Preface

Why a cell biology textbook? What is its value in a world of online resources
so vast that any information you might want about cells is, in principle, freely
available a few taps away?

The answer is that a textbook provides what open-ended Internet searches
cannot—a curation of knowledge and an expert, accurate guide to the beauty
and complexities of cells. Our book provides a narrative that leads the reader log-
ically and progressively through the key concepts, components, and experiments
in such a way that readers can build for themselves a memorable, conceptual
framework for cell biology—a framework that will allow them to understand and
critically evaluate the exciting rush of new discoveries. That is what we have tried
to do in Molecular Biology of the Cell for each of its seven editions.

This edition was completed during the COVID-19 pandemic. Many of the
questions that this global crisis generated are cell biological questions­—including
how the virus gets into our cells, how it replicates, how our immune system
responds, how vaccines are developed, and how scientists produce the molecular
details of virus structure. Required for the rapid development of safe and effective
COVID-19 vaccines, answers to all of these questions can be found in this text-
book. To make room for them, as well as for many other major recent advances in
our knowledge, much previous content had to be removed.

Understanding the inner workings of cells requires more than words. Our
book contains more than 1500 illustrations that create a parallel narrative, closely
interwoven with the text. Each figure has been designed to highlight a key con-
cept. The unique clarity, simplicity, and consistency of the figures across chapters,
achieved by use of a common set of icon designs and colors (for example, DNA red
and proteins green), enables students to scan them as chapter overviews. In this
edition, important protein structures are depicted and their Protein Data Bank
(PDB) codes provided; these codes link to tools on the RCSB PDB website (www
.rcsb.org), where students can more fully explore the proteins that lie at the core of
cell biology. In addition, more than 180 narrated movies have been produced for
the book, each linked to the text to provide additional insights.

John Wilson and Tim Hunt have again contributed their distinctive and imagi-
native problems to help students gain a more active understanding of the text. The
end-of-chapter problems emphasize experiments and quantitative approaches
in order to encourage critical thinking. Their Digital Problems Book in Smartwork
greatly expands on these self-assessment problems and includes data analysis
and video review questions that are based on the movie links in the textbook.

Many millions of scientific papers are relevant to cell biology, and many import-
ant new ones are published daily. The challenge for textbook writers is to sort
through this overwhelming wealth of information to produce a clear and accurate
conceptual platform for understanding how cells work. We have aimed high, seeking
primarily to support the education of cell biology students, including the next gener-
ation of bioscientists, but also to support active scientists pursuing new fundamental
research and the search for practical advances to improve the human condition.

So, why read a textbook? We live in a world that presents humanity with many
challenging problems related to cell biology, including declining biodiversity,
climate change, food insecurity, environmental degradation, resource depletion,
and animal and plant diseases. We hope that this new edition of our textbook
will help the reader to better understand these problems and—for many—to
contribute to solving them.

Nomenclature for Genes
and Proteins
Each species has its own conventions for naming genes; the only common
feature is that they are always set in italics. In some species (such as humans),
gene names are spelled out all in capital letters; in other species (such as
zebrafish), all in lowercase; in yet others (most mouse genes), with the first letter
in uppercase and the rest in lowercase; or (as in Drosophila) with different
combinations of uppercase and lowercase, according to whether the first mutant
allele to be discovered produced a dominant or recessive phenotype. Conven-
tions for naming protein products are equally varied.
This typographical chaos drives everyone crazy. Moreover, there are many
occasions, especially in a book such as this, where we need to refer to a gene
generically—without specifying the mouse version, the human version, the
chick version, or the hippopotamus version—because the gene variants across
species are all equivalent for the purposes of our discussion. What convention
then should we use?
We have decided in this book to follow a uniform rule. We write all gene names
with the first letter in uppercase and the rest in lowercase, and all in italics, thus:
Bazooka, Cdc2, Dishevelled, Egl1. The corresponding protein, where it is named
after the gene, will be written in the same way, but in roman rather than italic
letters: Bazooka, Cdc2, Dishevelled, Egl1. When it is necessary to specify the
organism, this can be done with a prefix to the gene name.
For completeness, we list a few further details of naming rules that we shall
follow. In some instances, an added letter in the gene name is traditionally used
to distinguish between genes that are related by function or evolution; for those
genes, we put that letter in uppercase if it is usual to do so (LacZ, RecA, HoxA4).
Proteins are more of a problem. Many of them have names in their own right,
assigned to them before the gene was named. Such protein names take many
forms, although most of them traditionally begin with a lowercase letter (actin,
hemoglobin, catalase); others are acronyms (such as GFP, for green fluorescent
protein, or BMP4, for bone morphogenetic protein 4). To force all such protein
names into a uniform style would do too much violence to established usages,
and we shall simply write them in the traditional way. For the corresponding gene
names in all these cases, we shall nevertheless follow our standard rule: Actin,
Hemoglobin, Catalase, Bmp4, Gfp.
For those who wish to know them, the table shows some of the official con-
ventions for individual species—conventions that we shall mostly violate in this
book, in the manner shown.

Cells, Genomes, and the
Diversity of Life
The surface of our planet is populated by living things—organisms—curious,
intricately organized chemical factories that take in matter from their sur-
roundings and use these raw materials to generate copies of themselves. These
organisms appear extraordinarily diverse. What could be more different than a
tiger and a piece of seaweed or a butterfly and a tree? Yet our ancestors, knowing
nothing of cells or DNA, saw that all these things had something in common.
They called that something “life,” marveled at it, struggled to define it, and
despaired of explaining what it was or how it worked in terms that relate to non-
living matter.
The remarkable discoveries of the past 100 years or so have not diminished the
marvel—quite the contrary. But they have removed the central mystery regarding
the nature of life. We can now see that all living things are made of cells: small,
membrane-enclosed units filled with a concentrated aqueous solution of chemi-
cals and endowed with the extraordinary ability to create copies of themselves by
growing and then dividing in two.
Because cells are the fundamental units of life, it is to cell biology—the study
of the structure, function, and behavior of cells—that we must look for answers
to the questions of what life is and how it works. With a deeper understand-
ing of cells and their evolution, we can begin to tackle the grand historical
problems of life on Earth: its mysterious origins, its stunning diversity, and
its invasion of every conceivable habitat. Indeed, as emphasized long ago by
the pioneering cell biologist E. B. Wilson, “the key to every biological problem
must finally be sought in the cell; for every living organism is, or at some time
has been, a cell.”
Despite their apparent diversity, living things are fundamentally similar
inside. The whole of biology is thus a counterpoint between two themes: aston-
ishing variety in individual particulars and astonishing constancy in fundamental
mechanisms. In this chapter, we begin by outlining the universal features com-
mon to all life on our planet, along with some of the fundamental properties of
their cells. We then discuss how an analysis of DNA genomes allows scientists
to position the wide variety of organisms in an evolutionary “tree of life.” This

approach, which quantifies how closely organisms are related to one another,
allows us to identify the three major branches of life on Earth, eukaryotes, bacte-
ria, and archaea—each with unique qualities. We shall see that the familiar world
of plants and animals—the focus of scientists for many centuries—makes up only
a small slice of the complete diversity of life, the vast majority of which is invisible
to the unaided human eye.
After exploring some of the ways that genomes change over evolutionary
times, we highlight the handful of model organisms that biologists have chosen
to focus on to dissect the molecular mechanisms underlying life. A few specific
viruses, including SARS-CoV-2, pose grave threats to humans, so they too have
become objects of intensive study. For this reason, this section also includes an
introduction to viruses, the ubiquitous parasites that have evolved to feed on
cells. Viruses are now recognized to be the most abundant biological entities on
the planet.
THE UNIVERSAL FEATURES OF LIFE ON EARTH
There are more than 2 million described species living on Earth today, but many,
many more are yet to be discovered. Each species is different, and each repro-
duces itself faithfully, yielding progeny that are unique to that species. Thus, the
parent organism hands down information specifying, in extraordinary detail,
the characteristics that the offspring will have. This phenomenon of heredity is
central to the definition of life: it distinguishes life from other processes, such as
the growth of a crystal, or the burning of a candle, or the formation of waves on
water, in which structures are generated without the same type of link between
the peculiarities of parents and offspring. A living organism must consume free
energy to exist, as does a candle flame. But life employs this free energy to drive
a very complex system of chemical reactions that create and maintain the intri-
cate organization of its cells, all as specified by the hereditary information in
those cells.
Most living organisms are single cells. Others, such as us, are like vast multicel-
lular cities in which groups of cells perform specialized functions that are linked
by intricate systems of intercellular communication. But even for the aggregate
of more than 1013 cells that makes up a human body, the whole organism has
been generated by cell divisions from a single cell. The single cell therefore con-
tains all of the hereditary information that defines a species (Figure 1–1). The cell
must also contain all of the machinery needed to gather raw materials from the
environment and to construct from them a new cell in its own image, complete
with a new copy of the hereditary information of its parent. Every cell on Earth is
truly amazing.
All Cells Store Their Hereditary Information in the Form
of Double-Strand DNA Molecules
Computers have made us familiar with the concept of information as a measur-
able quantity—106 bytes to record a few hundred pages of text or an image from
a digital camera, 109 bytes for a 60-minute video streamed from the Internet, and
so on. Computers have also made us well aware that the same information can
be recorded in many different physical forms: the discs and tapes that we used
25 years ago for our electronic archives have become unreadable on present-day
machines. Living cells, like computers, store information, and it is estimated that
they have been evolving and diversifying for more than 3.5 billion years. One
might not expect that they would all store their information in the same form or
that the hereditary information carried by one type of cell should be readable by
the information-handling machinery of another. And yet it is so. This fact pro-
vides compelling evidence that all living things on Earth have inherited the form
of their genetic instructions, as well as how to use them, from a universal com-
mon ancestral cell. This ancestor is thought to have existed roughly 3.5–3.8 billion
years ago.3
THE UNIVERSAL FEATURES OF LIFE ON EARTH
(A)
(C)
100 µ m
(B)
(E)
50 µ m
50 µ m
(D)
(F)
Figure 1–1 The hereditary information in the fertilized egg cell determines the nature of the whole multicellular
organism that will develop from it. As indicated, although their starting cells look superficially similar, the egg of a sea
urchin gives rise to a sea urchin (A and B), the egg of a mouse gives rise to a mouse (C and D), and the egg of the seaweed
Fucus gives rise to a Fucus seaweed (E and F). (A, courtesy of David McClay; B, courtesy of Tim Hunt; C, courtesy of Patricia
Calarco, from G. Martin, Science 209:768–776, 1980. With permission from AAAS; D, Rudmer Zwerver/Alamy Stock Photo;
E and F, courtesy of Colin Brownlee.)
All cells on Earth today store their hereditary information in the form of
double-strand molecules of DNA—long, unbranched, paired polymer chains,
which are always composed of the same fourMBoC7
types m1.01/1.01
of monomers. These mono-
mers, chemical compounds known as nucleotides, have nicknames drawn from
a four-letter alphabet—A, T, C, G—and they are strung together in a long linear
sequence that encodes the hereditary information, just as the sequence of 1’s and
0’s encodes the information in a computer file. We can take a piece of DNA from a
human cell and insert it into a bacterium or a piece of bacterial DNA and insert it
into a human cell, and, with only a few minor modifications, the information will
be successfully read, interpreted, and copied. As we describe in Chapter 8, scien-
tists can now rapidly read out the sequence of nucleotides in any DNA molecule
and thereby determine the complete DNA sequence of any cell’s genome—the
totality of its hereditary information embodied in the linear sequence of nucleo­
tides in its DNA. As a result, we now know the complete genome sequences for
tens of thousands of species, ranging from the smallest bacterium to the largest
plants and animals on Earth.
All Cells Replicate Their Hereditary Information
by Templated Polymerization
The mechanisms that make life possible depend on the structure of the
double-strand DNA molecule. We discuss this remarkable molecule in detail
in Chapters 4 and 5; here we provide only an overview of its structure and
means of reproduction. Each monomer in a single DNA strand—that is, each
nucleotide—consists of two parts: a sugar (deoxyribose) with a phosphate
group attached to it, and a base, which may be either adenine (A), guanine (G),Chapter 1: Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life
4
(A)
building block of DNA
(D)
double-strand DNA
phosphate
sugar
+ G
sugar–
phosphate
(B)
G
base
nucleotide
ATTGCCAGT
GTAACGGTCA
DNA strand
G
T
A
A
C
G
G
T
sugar–phosphate
backbone
A
C
(E)
(C)
C
hydrogen-bonded
base pairs
DNA double helix
templated polymerization of new strand
nucleotide
monomers
C
C
A
TT
GTAA
G
G
T
C
C
G
G
G
C
A
A
C
A
T
G
G
C
A
G
T
A
T
C
G
A
C
Figure 1–2 DNA and its building blocks. (A) DNA is made from simple subunits, called nucleotides. Each nucleotide
consists of a specific arrangement of about 35 covalently linked atoms, forming a sugar–phosphate molecule with a nitrogen-
containing side group, or base, attached to it. The bases are of four types (adenine, guanine, cytosine, and thymine),
corresponding to four distinct nucleotides, labeled A, G, C, and T. (B) A single strand of DNA consists of nucleotides joined
together by sugar–phosphate linkages. Note that the individual sugar–phosphate units are asymmetric, giving the backbone
of the strand a definite directionality, or polarity. This directionality guides the molecular processes by which the information in
DNA is both interpreted and copied (replicated) in cells: the information is always “read” in a consistent order, just as written
English text is read from left to right. (C) Through templated polymerization, the sequence of nucleotides in an existing DNA
strand controls the sequence in which nucleotides are joined together in a new DNA strand; T in one strand pairs with A in
the other, and G in one strand with C in the other. The new strand therefore has a nucleotide sequence complementary to
that of the old strand and a backbone with opposite directionality: thus, GTAA... in the original strand, is ...TTAC in the new
strand. (D) A normal DNA molecule consists of two such complementary strands. The nucleotides within each strand are
linked by strong (covalent) chemical bonds; the complementary nucleotides on opposite strands are held together more
weakly, by hydrogen bonds. (E) The two strands twist around each other to form a double helix—a robust structure that can
accommodate any sequence of nucleotides without altering its basic double-helical structure (see Movie 4.1).
cytosine (C), or thymine (T) (Figure 1–2). Each
sugarm1.02/1.02
is linked to the next via
MBoC7
the phosphate group, creating a polymer chain composed of a repetitive sugar–
phosphate backbone with a series of bases protruding from it. The DNA polymer
is extended by adding monomers at one end. For a single isolated strand, these
monomers can, in principle, be added in any order, because each one links to
the next in the same way, through the part of the molecule that is the same for
all of them. In the living cell, however, DNA is not synthesized as a free strand
in isolation, but on a template formed by a preexisting DNA strand. The bases
that protrude from this template can bind to bases of the strand being synthe-
sized, according to a strict rule defined by the complementary structures of the
bases: A binds to T, and C binds to G. This base-pairing holds fresh monomers
in place and thereby controls the selection of which one of the four monomers
will next be added to a growing strand. In this way, a double-strand structure is
created, consisting of two exactly complementary sequences of A’s, C’s, T’s, and
G’s. These two strands twist around each other, forming a DNA double helix (see
Figure 1–2E).
Compared with the covalent sugar–phosphate bonds, the hydrogen bonds
between the base pairs are weak, which allows the two DNA strands to be
C
A5
THE UNIVERSAL FEATURES OF LIFE ON EARTH
template strand
new strand
new strand
Figure 1–3 The copying of genetic
information by DNA replication. In this
process, the two strands of a DNA double
helix are pulled apart, and each serves
as a template for the synthesis of a new
complementary strand. The end result is
two daughter DNA double helices that
are identical in sequence to the parent
double helix.
parent DNA double helix
template strand
pulled apart without breakage of their backbones. Each strand then can serve
as a template, in the way just described, for the synthesis of a fresh DNA strand
complementary to itself—a fresh copy, that is, of the hereditary information
(Figure 1–3). In different types of cells, this process of DNA replication occurs
at different rates, with different
controls to start it or stop it, and with different
MBoC7 m1.03/1.03
auxiliary molecules to help the process along (discussed in Chapters 5 and 17).
But the basics are universal: DNA is the information store for heredity, and tem-
plated polymerization is the way in which this information is copied throughout
the living world.
All Cells Transcribe Portions of Their DNA into RNA Molecules
To carry out its information-bearing function, DNA must do more than copy itself.
It must also express its information, by letting the information guide the synthesis
of other molecules in the cell. This expression occurs by a mechanism that is the
same in all living organisms, leading first and foremost to the production of two
other crucial classes of biological polymers: RNA molecules and protein mole-
cules. The process begins with a templated polymerization called transcription,
in which segments of the DNA sequence are used as templates for the synthe-
sis of shorter molecules of the closely related polymer ribonucleic acid, or RNA.
Subsequently, in a process called translation, many of these RNA molecules
direct the synthesis of polymers of a radically different chemical class—the pro-
teins (Figure 1–4). The detailed chemical reactions involved are presented in
Chapter 6; here they will only be briefly outlined.
The backbone of an RNA molecule is formed by a slightly different sugar from
that in DNA—ribose instead of deoxyribose; in addition, one of the four bases is
slightly different—uracil (U) replaces thymine (T). Most important, however, the
other three bases—A, C, and G—are identical to those in DNA, and all four bases
will pair with their complementary counterparts in DNA—the A, U, C, and G of
RNA with the T, A, G, and C of DNA, respectively. During transcription, this pair-
ing allows the RNA monomers to be lined up and selected for polymerization on
a template strand of DNA, just as DNA monomers are selected during replication.
The outcome is a single-strand polymer molecule whose sequence of nucleotides
faithfully represents a portion of the cell’s genetic information, even though it is
written in a slightly different alphabet—consisting of the four RNA monomers
instead of the four DNA monomers.
The same segment of DNA can be used repeatedly to guide the synthesis
of many identical RNA molecules. Thus, whereas the cell’s archive of genetic
information in the form of DNA is fixed and sacrosanct, RNA transcripts are
mass-produced and disposable. Most of these transcripts function as intermedi-
ates in the transfer of genetic information by serving as messenger RNA (mRNA)
molecules that guide the synthesis of proteins according to the genetic instruc-
tions stored in the DNA. But as we discuss in Chapter 6, some RNA transcripts
do not serve as information carriers; instead, they function directly in the cell to
carry out a variety of other functions.
DNA
DNA synthesis
REPLICATION
nucleotides
DNA
RNA synthesis
TRANSCRIPTION
RNA
protein synthesis
TRANSLATION
PROTEIN
amino acids
Figure 1–4 From DNA to protein. In
addition to DNA replication (shown at the
top of the figure), genetic information is
read out and put to use through a two-step
process: First, in transcription, segments
of the DNA sequence are used to guide
the synthesis of molecules of RNA. Then,
in translation,
molecules are used to
MBoC7RNA
m1.04/1.04
guide the synthesis of proteins, which are
polymers made of amino acid subunits
(discussed shortly).6
Chapter 1: Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life
All Cells Use Proteins as Catalysts
Like DNA and RNA molecules, protein molecules are long unbranched poly-
mer chains, formed by stringing together monomeric building blocks (subunits)
drawn from a standard repertoire that is the same for all living cells. Like DNA and
RNA, proteins carry information in the form of a linear sequence of subunits in
the same way as a human message written in an alphabetic script. There are many
different protein molecules in each cell, and—if we ignore water molecules—they
form the major portion of the cell’s mass.
The subunits of proteins are the amino acids, which are quite different from
the nucleotides of DNA and RNA, and there are 20 types instead of 4. Each amino
acid is built around a core structure that allows it to be covalently linked in a
standard way to any other amino acid in the set; attached to this core is a side
group of atoms that gives each amino acid a distinctive chemical character. Each
protein molecule is a polypeptide chain that is created by joining its amino acids
in a particular sequence; this sequence determines how the polypeptide folds
up, giving the protein its unique three-dimensional structure. Through several
billion years of evolution, these sequences have been selected to give each protein a
useful function.
By folding into a precise structure that binds with high specificity to other
molecules, each protein performs a specific function according to its genetically
specified sequence of amino acids. Proteins form and maintain diverse cell and
extracellular structures, generate movements, sense signals, and so on. Many
have reactive sites on their surface, allowing them to act as enzymes that cata-
lyze reactions that make or break specific covalent bonds. Proteins, above all,
are the main molecules that put the cell’s genetic information into action. Thus,
polynucleotides (DNA and mRNAs) specify the amino acid sequences of proteins.
Proteins, in turn, serve as catalysts to cause many different chemical reactions to
occur, including those that synthesize new DNA and RNA molecules.
In everyday speech, a catalyst refers to “any agent that provokes or speeds sig-
nificant change or action.” But in chemistry, the term catalyst is defined more
narrowly, being applied to any molecule that speeds up a specific chemical reac-
tion without itself being changed. From the most fundamental point of view, a
living cell is a self-replicating collection of catalysts that takes in food, processes
this food to provide both the building blocks and energy needed to make more
catalysts, and discards the materials left over as waste (Figure 1–5A). Together,
these feedback loops that connect proteins and polynucleotides form the basis for
this autocatalytic, self-reproducing behavior of all living organisms (Figure 1–5B).
All Cells Translate RNA into Protein in the Same Way
How the information in DNA specifies the production of proteins was a complete
mystery in the 1950s when the double-strand structure of DNA was first revealed
as the basis of heredity. But in subsequent years, scientists discovered the elegant
(A)
FOOD IN
WASTE OUT
(B)
building
blocks
energy
cell's collection
of catalysts
CELL'S COLLECTION OF CATALYSTS
COLLABORATE TO REPRODUCE THE
ENTIRE COLLECTION BEFORE
A CELL DIVIDES
Figure 1–5 Life as an autocatalytic
process. (A) The living cell is a self-
replicating collection of catalysts. (B) Life
can be viewed as an autocatalytic process.
DNA and RNA molecules provide the
nucleotide sequence information (green
arrows) that is used both to produce
proteins and to copy themselves. Proteins,
in turn, provide the catalytic activity (red
arrows) needed to synthesize DNA, RNA,
and proteins themselves. Together, these
feedback loops create the self-replicating
system that endows cells with the ability to
reproduce. Although the great majority of
the catalysts in the cell are proteins (known
as enzymes), a few RNA molecules (known
as ribozymes) also have this property, as
we will see in Chapter 6.
DNA and RNA
nucleotides
SEQUENCE
INFORMATION
CATALYTIC
ACTIVITY
proteins
amino acidsTHE UNIVERSAL FEATURES OF LIFE ON EARTH
mechanisms involved. The translation of genetic information from the 4-letter
alphabet of polynucleotides into the 20-letter alphabet of proteins is a complex
process. The rules of this translation seem in some respects neat and rational but
in other respects strangely arbitrary, given that they are (with minor exceptions)
identical in all living things. These arbitrary features, it is thought, reflect frozen
accidents in the early history of life. They stem from the chance properties of the
earliest organisms that were passed on by heredity and have become so deeply
embedded in the constitution of all living cells that they cannot be changed
without disastrous consequences.
It turns out that the information in the sequence of a messenger RNA (mRNA)
molecule is read out in groups of three nucleotides at a time: each triplet of
nucleotides, or codon, specifies (codes for, or encodes) a single amino acid in a
corresponding protein. Because the number of distinct triplets that can be formed
from four nucleotides is 43, there are 64 possible codons, all of which occur in
nature. However, there are only 20 naturally occurring amino acids, which means
there are necessarily many cases in which several codons correspond to the same
amino acid. This genetic code is read out by a special class of small RNA molecules,
called transfer RNAs (tRNAs). Each type of tRNA becomes attached at one end to
a specific amino acid and displays at its other end a specific sequence of three
nucleotides—an anticodon—that enables it to recognize, through base-pairing,
a particular codon or subset of codons in mRNA. The intricate chemistry that
enables these tRNAs to translate a specific sequence of A, C, G, and U nucleo-
tides in an mRNA molecule into a specific sequence of amino acids in a protein
molecule occurs on a ribosome, a large multimolecular machine composed of
both protein and ribosomal RNA. All of these processes will be described in detail
in Chapter 6.
Each Protein Is Encoded by a Specific Gene
DNA molecules as a rule are very large, containing the specifications for thou-
sands of proteins and RNA molecules. Special sequences in the DNA serve as
punctuation, defining where the information for each RNA and protein begins
and ends. And individual segments of the long DNA sequence are transcribed
into separate mRNA molecules, coding for different proteins. Each such DNA
segment represents one gene. As previously mentioned, some DNA segments—a
smaller number—are transcribed into RNA molecules that are not translated into
protein but have other functions in the cell; such DNA segments also count as
genes. A gene therefore is defined as the segment of DNA sequence correspond-
ing either to a single protein (but sometimes to a set of closely related, alternative
protein variants) or to a single catalytic, regulatory, or structural RNA molecule.
In all cells, the expression of individual genes is regulated: instead of manu-
facturing its full repertoire of possible proteins and RNAs at full tilt all the time,
the cell adjusts the rate of transcription and translation of different genes inde-
pendently, according to need. As we shall see in Chapter 7, stretches of regulatory
DNA are interspersed among the segments that code for protein, and these
noncoding regions bind to special protein molecules that control the rate of
transcription of individual genes. The organization of this regulatory DNA varies
widely from one class of organisms to another, but the basic strategy is univer-
sal. In this way, the genome of the cell dictates not only the nature of the cell’s
proteins but also when and where they are to be made.
Life Requires a Continual Input of Free Energy
A living cell is a dynamic chemical system, operating far from chemical equilib-
rium. For a cell to grow or to make a new cell in its own image, it must take in
free energy from the environment, as well as raw materials, to drive the neces-
sary synthetic reactions. This consumption of free energy is fundamental to life.
When this energy is not available, a cell decays toward chemical equilibrium and
soon dies.
78
Chapter 1: Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life
As one example, free energy is required for the propagation of genetic infor-
mation. Picture the molecules in a cell as a swarm of objects endowed with
thermal energy, moving around violently at random, buffeted by collisions with
one another. To copy genetic information—in the form of a DNA sequence, for
example—nucleotide molecules from this wild crowd must be captured, arranged
in a specific order defined by a preexisting template, and linked together in a
fixed relationship. The bonds that hold the nucleotides in their proper places on
the template and join them together must be strong enough to resist the disor-
dering effect of thermal motion, which we describe shortly. The joining process
is driven forward by a consumption of free energy, which is needed to ensure that
the correct bonds are made, and made robustly. As an analogy, the molecules
might be compared with spring-loaded traps, ready to snap into a more stable,
lower-energy attached state when they meet their proper partners. As they snap
together into the bonded arrangement, their available stored energy—their free
energy—like the energy of the spring in the trap, is released and dissipated as
heat. In a cell, the chemical processes underlying information transfer are more
complex, but the same basic principle applies: free energy must be spent for the
creation of order.
To replicate its genetic information faithfully, and indeed to make all its com-
plex molecules according to the correct specifications, the cell therefore requires
free energy, which has to be imported somehow from the surroundings. As we will
discuss in detail in Chapter 2, the free energy required by animal cells is derived
from chemical bonds in food molecules that the animals eat, whereas plants get
their free energy from sunlight.
All Cells Function as Biochemical Factories
hydrophilic
head
(A)
phospholipid
monolayer
Because all cells make DNA, RNA, and protein, they all have to contain and
manipulate a similar collection of small organic (carbon-containing) molecules,
including simple sugars, nucleotides, and amino acids, as well as other substances
that are universally required. All cells, for example, require the phosphorylated
nucleotide ATP (adenosine triphosphate), not only as a building block for the syn-
thesis of DNA and RNA but also as a carrier of the free energy that is needed to
drive a huge number of chemical reactions in the cell.
Although all cells function as biochemical factories of a broadly similar type,
many of the details of their small-molecule transactions differ. Plants, for exam-
ple, require only the simplest of nutrients because they harness the energy of
sunlight to make all their own small organic molecules. Other organisms, such
as animals and some bacteria, feed on living (or once living) organisms and
must obtain many of their organic molecules ready-made. We return to this
point later in the chapter.
OIL
phospholipid
bilayer forming
a vesicle
All Cells Are Enclosed in a Plasma Membrane Across Which
Nutrients and Waste Materials Must Pass
Each living cell is enclosed by a membrane—the plasma membrane. This mem-
brane acts as a selective barrier that enables the cell to concentrate nutrients
gathered from its environment and retain the products it synthesizes for its own
use, while excreting its waste products. Without a plasma membrane, the cell
could not maintain its integrity as a coordinated chemical system.
The molecules that form cell membranes have the simple physicochemical
property of being amphiphilic; that is, they consist of one part that is hydrophilic
(water-soluble) and another part that is hydrophobic (water-insoluble). Such
molecules placed in water aggregate spontaneously, arranging their hydropho-
bic portions to be as much in contact with one another as possible to hide them
from the water, while keeping their hydrophilic portions exposed. Amphiphilic
molecules of appropriate shape, such as the phospholipid molecules that com-
pose most of the molecules of the plasma membrane, spontaneously aggregate in
water to create a bilayer that forms small closed vesicles (Figure 1–6).
hydrophobic
tails
WATER
(B)
Figure 1–6 Behavior of phospholipid
molecules in water. (A) A phospholipid
molecule is amphiphilic, having a
hydrophilic (water-loving) phosphate
head group and a hydrophobic (water-
avoiding) hydrocarbon tail. (B) At
an interface between oil and water,
MBoC7 m1.09/1.06
phospholipids
arrange themselves as a
single sheet (a monolayer), with their
head groups facing the water and their
tail groups facing the oil. When immersed
in water, however, phospholipids
aggregate to form lipid bilayers that fold
in on themselves to form sealed aqueous
compartments known as vesicles.THE UNIVERSAL FEATURES OF LIFE ON EARTH
Although the chemical details vary, the hydrophobic tails of the predominant
lipid molecules in all cells are hydrocarbon polymers (–CH2–CH2–CH2–), and
their spontaneous assembly into a lipid bilayer is but one of many examples of an
important general principle: cells produce molecules whose chemical properties
cause them to self-assemble into the structures that a cell needs.
The cell boundary cannot be totally impermeable. If a cell is to grow and
reproduce, it must be able to import raw materials and export waste across its
plasma membrane. All cells therefore have specialized proteins embedded in
their plasma membrane that transport specific molecules from one side to the
other. Some of these membrane transport proteins, like some of the proteins that
catalyze the fundamental small-molecule reactions inside the cell, have been
so well conserved over the course of evolution that we can recognize the fam-
ily resemblances between them when even the most distantly related organisms
are compared.
The transport proteins in the plasma membrane largely determine which
molecules enter the cell, while the catalytic proteins (enzymes) inside the cell
determine the reactions that the entering molecules undergo. Thus, by specifying
the RNAs and proteins that the cell produces, the genetic information recorded
in the DNA sequence dictates the entire chemistry of the cell—in fact, not only its
chemistry but also its form and its behavior, for these too are chiefly determined
and controlled by the cell’s proteins.
Cells Operate at a Microscopic Scale Dominated by Random
Thermal Motion
Thus far we have described the cell as a self-replicating, membrane-bound bag
of chemicals and macromolecules; but, as the unit of life, the cell is much more
than the sum of its parts. Although not obvious from microscopy images, even
the simplest cell is highly ordered internally: its individual components must
self-assemble and become highly organized for the cell to function. And the cell
contents are in perpetual motion. The most obvious movements are catalyzed by
motor proteins, enzymes that use the energy of ATP hydrolysis for a wide variety
of purposes; these include pumping ions across the plasma membrane, translo-
cating large assemblies from one intracellular site to another, and propelling the
cell through its environment. In addition, and as previously mentioned, random
thermal motions of molecules (including water) are prominent at the scale of
cells—whose dimensions can be as small as a micrometer (10–6 meters) in diam-
eter. This type of spontaneous movement, called thermal or Brownian motion,
was first observed by Robert Brown in 1827, while looking through a microscope
at pollen grains immersed in water. Caused by random molecular collisions, the
constant fluctuating movement has important repercussions. Brownian motion
drives a process called diffusion, and it determines the rates of biochemical reac-
tions as molecules collide with one another within the interior of a cell (described
in Chapter 2; see Movie 2.4).
Even though random, the cell can harness Brownian motion for its own
advantage. For example, during one step in the crawling migration of animal
cells, the plasma membrane at the leading edge extends forward (see Chapter 16).
This movement does not involve motor proteins. Instead, a cytoskeletal filament
(an actin polymer) polymerizes adjacent to the inner membrane surface. When
the membrane fluctuates in the forward direction, actin quickly fills in the gap
so that the membrane cannot slip back to its original position. This phenome-
non, in which random thermal motions are harnessed in a directed way, creates a
Brownian ratchet (Figure 1–7).
Because an object at the micrometer scale is constantly buffeted by water mol-
ecules, its movement requires overcoming high viscous drag forces. As a result,
the directed movement of a complex of molecules inside the cell (by a motor pro-
tein, for example) will stop immediately when the motor disengages, leaving the
complex to be randomly buffeted by thermal motion. There is no “gliding” inside
the cell.
910
Chapter 1: Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life
plasma membrane
actin
filament
Figure 1–7 How membrane protrusion
is driven by a simple Brownian ratchet.
A single actin filament is shown abutting
the plasma membrane, which is fluctuating
back and forth because of random thermal
motions. When the membrane happens to
move away from the end of the filament,
it creates sufficient space for an additional
subunit, which quickly adds on. The
slightly longer filament acts as a ratchet
and prevents the membrane from moving
back to its original position. In a migrating
animal cell, this Brownian ratchet process
drives protrusion of the membrane and
contributes to forward movement of
the cell, as described in Chapter 16
(see pp. 956–957).
A Living Cell Can Exist with 500 Genes
We have seen how genomes carry the information for all the proteins and RNA
molecules of a cell, and how, through catalysis, all the other building blocks of
the cell are made. But how complex are real living cells? In particular, what are
the minimum requirements of a living cell? One measure of complexity is based
MBoC7inn1.110/1.07
on the total number of genes
an organism’s genome. A species that has one
of the smallest known genomes is the bacterium Mycoplasma genitalium, which
causes a common, sexually transmitted, human disease (Figure 1–8). This organ-
ism lives as a parasite in mammals, where the environment provides it with many
of the small molecules it needs ready-made. Nevertheless, it still has to make all
the large molecules—DNA, RNAs, and proteins. It has 525 genes, most of which
are essential. Its genome of 580,070 nucleotide pairs represents 145,018 bytes of
information—about as much as it takes to record the text of one chapter of this
book. Cell biology may be complicated, but it is not unimaginably so.
Summary
The individual cell is the minimal self-reproducing unit of life. A cell consists of a
self-replicating collection of catalysts, enclosed in a plasma membrane. All cells
operate as biochemical factories, driven by the free energy released in a complicated
network of chemical reactions. Central to a cell’s ability to reproduce is the trans-
mission of its genetic information to its progeny cells when it divides. All cells store
their genetic information in double-strand DNA, and the complete sequence of
DNA nucleotides for each organism is known as its genome. The cell replicates this
information by separating the paired DNA strands and using each as a template
for polymerization to make a new DNA strand with a complementary sequence of
nucleotide subunits. The same strategy of templated polymerization is used in the
transcription of portions of the DNA into molecules of the closely related polynu-
cleotide polymer, RNA. Most of these RNA molecules are mRNAs that in turn guide
the synthesis of protein molecules by the process of translation. Proteins are poly-
mers of amino acid subunits and are the catalysts for almost all the cell’s chemical
reactions. They are also responsible for the selective import and export of molecules
across the plasma membrane that surrounds each cell. The specific shape and func-
tion of each protein depend on its amino acid sequence, which is specified by the
nucleotide sequence of a corresponding segment of the DNA—the gene that codes
for that protein. In this way, the DNA of the cell determines the cell’s chemistry,
which is fundamentally similar in all cells, reflecting their ultimate origin from a
common ancestor cell that existed on Earth more than 3.5 billion years ago.
GENOME DIVERSIFICATION AND THE TREE OF LIFE
The success of living organisms based on DNA, RNA, and protein has been spec-
tacular. Through its billions of years of proliferation, life has populated the oceans,
covered the land, penetrated deep into Earth’s crust, and molded the surface of
0.2 µ m
Figure 1–8 The small bacterium
Mycoplasma genitalium. It is viewed
here in cross section in an electron
microscope, which uses a beam of
electrons instead of light to create an
image with a resolution that is many times
higher than that of an image viewed in a
conventional light microscope. Of the
525 genes this bacterium contains,
43 code for transfer RNAs, ribosomal
RNAs, and other nonprotein-coding
RNAs. Of the 482 protein-coding
genes, 154
are involved
in replication,
MBoC7
m1.10/1.08
transcription, translation, and related
processes involving DNA, RNA, and
protein; 98 are involved in the membrane
and surface structures of the cell; 46
are involved in the transport of nutrients
and other molecules across the plasma
membrane; and 71 are involved
in energy conversion and the synthesis
and degradation of small molecules.
(Courtesy of Roger Cole, in Medical
Microbiology, 4th ed. [S. Baron, ed.].
Galveston: University of Texas Medical
Branch, 1996.)GENOME DIVERSIFICATION AND THE TREE OF LIFE
our planet. Our oxygen-rich atmosphere, the deposits of coal and oil, the layers
of iron ores, the cliffs of chalk and limestone and marble—all these are products,
directly or indirectly, of past biological activity on Earth.
Living things are not confined to the familiar temperate realm of land, water,
and sunlight inhabited by plants and animals. They are found in the darkest
depths of the ocean, in hot volcanic mud, in pools beneath the frozen surface
of the Antarctic, and buried kilometers deep in Earth’s crust. The creatures that
live in these extreme environments are generally unfamiliar, not only because
they are inaccessible, but also because they are mostly microscopic and cannot
be maintained in a laboratory. Even in more familiar habitats, most organisms
are too small for us to see without special equipment: they tend to go unnoticed,
unless they cause a disease or rot the timbers of our houses. Yet such microor-
ganisms (microbes) are by far the most numerous living organisms on our planet.
Only recently, through new methods of molecular analysis including rapid DNA
sequencing, have we begun to get a picture of life on Earth that is not grossly dis-
torted by our biased perspective as large animals living on dry land.
In this section, we consider—in very broad terms—the diversity of organisms
on our planet and the relationships among them. Because the genetic informa-
tion for every organism is written in the universal language of DNA sequences,
and because the DNA sequence of any organism’s genome can be readily
determined, it is now possible to characterize, catalog, and compare any set of
living organisms with reference to these sequences. From such comparisons we
can specify the place of each organism in the family tree of living species—the
“tree of life.”
The Tree of Life Has Three Major Domains: Eukaryotes, Bacteria,
and Archaea
The classification of living things has traditionally depended on comparisons of
their outward appearances: we can see that a fish has eyes, jaws, backbone, brain,
and so on, just as humans do, and that a worm does not—just as we can see that a
rosebush is more similar to an apple tree than to grass. As Darwin showed, we can
readily interpret such close family resemblances in terms of an evolution from
common ancestors, and we can find the remains of many of these ancestors pre-
served in the fossil record. In this way, it became possible to draw a family tree of
living organisms, showing the various lines of descent, as well as branch points in
evolutionary history, where the ancestors of one group of species became differ-
ent from those of another.
When the disparities between organisms become very great, however, these
methods begin to fail. How do we decide whether a fungus is more closely related
to a plant or to an animal? When it comes to microscopic organisms such as
bacteria, the task becomes harder still: one tiny rod or sphere can look much
like another. Moreover, much of our knowledge of the microbial world was tra-
ditionally restricted to those species that can be isolated and cultured in the
laboratory. But direct DNA sequencing of populations of microbes in their natural
habitats—such as soil, ocean water, or even the human mouth—has taught us
that the vast majority of microbes cannot be easily cultured in the laboratory.
Often, they thrive in the wild as components of complex ecosystems and—when
separated from their natural surroundings—cannot survive. Until modern DNA
sequencing was developed, these organisms were largely unknown to us, espe-
cially those that inhabit extreme environments such as the deep Earth’s crust or
seawater miles below the ocean surface.
Genome analysis has now provided us with a simple, direct, and powerful
way to determine evolutionary relationships. The complete DNA sequence of an
organism defines its nature with almost perfect precision and in exhaustive detail.
Moreover, this specification is in a digital form—a string of letters—that can be
entered into a computer and compared with the corresponding information for
any other organism. Because DNA is subject to random changes that accumu-
late over long periods of time (as we will see shortly), the number of differences
1112
Chapter 1: Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life
between the DNA sequences of two organisms can provide a direct, objective,
and quantitative indication of the evolutionary distance between them.
For constructing a comprehensive tree of life, it is necessary to begin with a
segment of DNA that is easily recognized in the genomes of all organisms. We
discussed earlier how all cells use the same fundamental mechanism to translate
a nucleotide sequence into a protein sequence, and we saw that the ribosome is
the “decoding machine” that carries this out. Ribosomes are fundamentally simi­
lar in all organisms, and an especially well-conserved component of them is the
RNA molecules that make up their core. Although the exact sequence of these
ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) differs across organisms, they are similar enough to use
them as a ruler to judge how closely two species are related: the more similar
the ribosomal RNA sequences, the more recently the two species diverged from
a common ancestor and the more related they must be. Once a rough approxi­
mation of the tree of life has been obtained in this way, many additional DNA
sequences in genomes—those that might not be identifiable in all organisms—
can accurately determine relationships among more closely related species.
This approach has revealed that the living world consists of three major divi-
sions, or domains: eukaryotes, bacteria, and archaea, as illustrated in Figure 1–9;
in the following paragraphs, we briefly introduce each in turn.
Spirochetes
Rickettsia
Neisseria
E. coli
Salmonella
Yersinia
Vibrio
Beggiatoa
PVC superphylum
(includes
Chlamydia)
Proteobacteria
Actinobacteria
(includes
Streptomyces)
Chloroflexi
based largely on genome
sequencing of environmental
samples
Firmicutes
(includes Clostridium,
Streptococcus,
Staphylococcus,
and Listeria)
ARCHAEA
Cyanobacteria
(includes Anabaena
and Phormidium)
Asgard
animals and
fungi
EUKARYOTES
plants
BACTERIA
Figure 1–9 A global tree of life, based on genome comparisons, shows the three major divisions (domains) of the living world. The lengths
of the branches are proportional to differences among genomes using common genes that can be recognized and compared across many different
species. Some of the organisms discussed in this and later chapters are indicated. Of the three domains of life (bacteria, archaea, and eukaryotes),
bacteria encompass by far the greatest diversity, commensurate with their ability to colonize nearly every ecological niche on the planet. So many
new bacterial species are currently being identified through DNA sequencing of environmental samples that simply naming them has become a
challenge. Although eukaryotes (and especially animals) are the main focus of this book, they comprise only a small slice of the global diversity. An
expanded eukaryotic tree is shown in Figure 1–35, and an expanded tree of mammals is given in Figure 4–67. (Adapted from C.J. Castelle and J.F.
MBoC7 n1.283/1.09
Banfield, Cell 172:1181–1197, 2018.)13
GENOME DIVERSIFICATION AND THE TREE OF LIFE
Eukaryotes Make Up the Domain of Life That Is Most
Familiar to Us
The great variety of living creatures that we see around us are eukaryotes. The
name is from the Greek, meaning “truly nucleated” (from the words eu, “well”
or “truly,” and karyon, “kernel” or “nucleus”), reflecting the fact that the cells of
these organisms have their DNA enclosed in a membrane-bound organelle called
the nucleus. Visible by simple light microscopy, this feature was used in the early
twentieth century to classify living organisms as either eukaryotes (those with a
nucleus) or prokaryotes (those without a nucleus). We now know that prokary-
otes comprise two of the three major domains of life, the bacteria and archaea.
Eukaryotic cells are typically much larger than those of bacteria and archaea;
in addition to a nucleus, they typically contain a variety of membrane-bound
organelles that are also lacking in the prokaryotes. The genomes of eukaryotes
also tend to run much larger—containing more than 20,000 genes for humans
and corals, for example, compared with 4000–6000 genes for the typical bacteria
or archaea.
In addition to plants and animals, the eukaryotes include fungi (such as mush-
rooms or the yeasts used in beer- and bread-making), as well as an astonishing
variety of single-celled, microscopic forms of life. Most of this book is focused
on the cell biology of eukaryotic organisms (especially animals); in the final sec-
tions of this chapter, we shall return to eukaryotes and focus on the variety within
this group.
On the Basis of Genome Analysis, Bacteria Are the Most Diverse
Group of Organisms on the Planet
When modern trees of life were constructed using genome information, one of
the big surprises was how much more evolutionarily diverse the bacterial world
is compared with the eukaryotes; we now know that this great diversity reflects
the much earlier appearance of bacteria in the evolutionary history of the planet.
Bacteria are usually very small (and invisible to the unaided eye), and they gener-
ally live as independent individuals or in loosely organized communities, rather
than as multicellular organisms. They are typically spherical or rod-shaped and
measure a few micrometers (μm) in linear dimension (Figure 1–10). They often
have a tough protective coat, called a cell wall, beneath which a plasma mem-
brane encloses a single cytoplasmic compartment—the cytoplasm—containing
DNA, RNA, proteins, and the many small molecules needed for life (Figure 1–11).
Although difficult to discern in the light microscope, the interior of a bacterium is
nevertheless highly organized, a topic we discuss in Chapter 16.
Commensurate with the diversity of their genomes, bacteria live in an enor-
mous variety of ecological niches, and they are astonishingly varied in their
2 µm
spherical
cells, e.g.,
Streptococcus
rod-shaped cells,
e.g., Escherichia coli,
Salmonella
the smallest
cells, e.g.,
Mycoplasma,
Spiroplasma
spiral cells,
e.g., Treponema pallidum
Figure 1–10 Shapes and sizes of some bacteria. Although most are small, as shown, measuring
a few micrometers in linear dimension, there are also some giant species. An extreme example is
the cigar-shaped bacterium Epulopiscium fishelsoni, which lives in the gut of a surgeonfish and can
be up to 600 μm long (not shown).14
Chapter 1: Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life
(A)
Figure 1–11 Bacterial structure. (A) A
drawing of the bacterium Vibrio cholerae,
showing its simple internal organization.
This species can infect the human small
intestine to cause cholera; the severe
diarrhea that accompanies this disease
kills more than 100,000 people a year
worldwide. Like many other bacteria, Vibrio
has a helical appendage at one end—a
flagellum—that rotates as a propeller to
drive the cell forward. (B) An electron
micrograph of a longitudinal section
through the widely studied bacterium
Escherichia coli (E. coli). E. coli is part of our
normal intestinal microbiota, the complete
collection of microbes in our gut. It has
many flagella distributed over its surface,
but they are not visible in this section.
Both of the bacteria shown here are Gram
negative, having both an outer and an
inner (plasma) membrane. However, many
bacterial species lack the outer membrane;
these are classified as Gram positive.
(B, courtesy of E. Kellenberger.)
flagellum
1 µm
ribosomes in cytosol
cell
wall
plasma
DNA
membrane
outer
cytoplasm
membrane
(B)
1 µm
biochemical capabilities. There exist species that can utilize virtually any type
of organic molecule as food, ranging from sugars and amino acids to hydrocar-
bons, including the simplest hydrocarbon, methane gas (CH4). Other species
(Figure 1–12) harvest light energy in a variety of ways; some, like plants, carry out
photosynthesis and generate oxygen as a by-product. Still others can feed on a
MBoC7 m1.14a,e1.11/1.11
plain diet of inorganic nutrients, getting
their carbon from CO2, and relying on a
host of other chemicals that occur in the environment to fuel their energy needs—
including H2, Fe2+, H2S, and elemental sulfur (Figure 1–13).
A wide range of bacteria directly affect human health. The bubonic plague of
the Middle Ages (estimated to have killed half the population of Europe) and the
current tuberculosis pandemic (more than a million deaths a year) are each due to
a specific species of bacteria. And thousands of different bacterial species reside
in our gut and on our skin, where they are often beneficial to us. We shall dis-
cuss bacteria throughout the book, as it is the study of these relatively simple cells
that led to much of our understanding of basic biological processes—including
DNA replication, transcription, and translation. We focus again on bacteria in
Chapter 24 when we examine the cell biology of infectious disease. Finally, genetic
H
(A)
(B)
S
V
10 µ m
1 µm
Figure 1–12 Photosynthetic bacteria.
(A) A light micrograph of the bacterium
Anabaena cylindrica. Its cells form long
chains, in which most of the cells (labeled
V) perform photosynthesis (and thereby
capture CO2 and incorporate C into organic
compounds); others (labeled H) become
specialized for fixing N from N2; and still
others (labeled S) develop into spores,
which can resist unfavorable conditions.
(B) An electron micrograph of a related
photosynthetic bacterium, Phormidium
laminosum, which shows the intracellular
membranes where photosynthesis occurs.
As shown in these micrographs, some
prokaryotes have intracellular membranes
and form colonies that resemble simple
multicellular organisms. (A, courtesy of
David Adams; B, courtesy of D.P. Hill and
C.J. Howe.)15
GENOME DIVERSIFICATION AND THE TREE OF LIFE
engineering techniques allow bacteria to be put to use as small “factories” to pro-
duce human pharmaceuticals, biofuels, and other high-value chemical products,
as we discuss in Chapter 8.
Archaea: The Most Mysterious Domain of Life
Of the three domains of life, archaea remains the most poorly understood. Most
of its members have been identified only by DNA sequencing of samples from
the environment, and relatively few have been cultured and studied up close
in the laboratory. Like bacteria, the archaea we know most about are small and
lack the internal, membrane-bound organelles that distinguish the eukaryotes.
But they differ from bacteria in many ways, including the chemistry of their cell
walls, the kinds of lipids that make up their membrane, and the range of bio-
chemical reactions that they can carry out. Another surprising conclusion came
from genome comparisons: although archaea resemble bacteria in their outward
appearances, their genomes are much more closely related to eukaryotes than to
bacteria (see Figure 1–9). It has even been proposed that the tree of life should be
considered to have only two principal domains, with the archaea and eukaryotes
making up one domain and bacteria constituting the other. The close relationship
of archaea and eukaryotes has also changed our views on how the earliest eukary-
otic cell evolved, a topic addressed later in this chapter.
At first it was thought that archaea occupied only extreme environments such
as volcanoes, salt lakes, acid hot springs, and the stomachs of cattle, but they are
now recognized to be present also in more congenial surroundings such as soils,
seawater, and our skin. Commensurate with the wide variety of ecological niches
in which they have been found, different species of archaea have highly diverse
chemistries. They are believed to be the predominant life-form in soil and seawa-
ter, and they play major roles in recycling nitrogen and carbon, two of the most
important elements for all cells.
6 µm
Figure 1–13 The bacterium Beggiatoa.
It lives in sulfurous environments (for
example, see Figure 1–15) and gets its
energy by oxidizing H2S; it can fix carbon
even in the dark. Note the yellow deposits
of sulfur inside the cells. (Courtesy of Ralph
S. Wolfe.)
MBoC7 m1.16/1.13
Organisms Occupy Most of Our Planet
To understand life on Earth, we need to understand more than its diversity;
we also need to know where life is found on our planet and how various living
species are distributed. Organisms inhabit nearly all of the planet, and we con-
tinue to discover new habitats. Amazingly, some bacteria and archaea even live
miles down in Earth’s deep crust and in the deepest and most hostile parts of
the oceans.
How are the main groups of organisms distributed among different envi-
ronments? DNA sequencing and other advanced technologies have been used
recently to address this question. The total biomass on Earth is estimated to con-
tain ∼550 gigatons (1015 grams) of carbon, of which 450 gigatons of carbon (Gt C)
is plants, 70 Gt C is bacteria, 7 Gt C is archaea, and 2 Gt C is animals (Figure 1–14).
The plants are mainly terrestrial; the bacteria and archaea are mainly in the soil
and Earth’s crust. Total terrestrial biomass is 100 times greater than that in the
oceans, although most of the animal mass is found in the oceans. The human
biomass is 10 times greater than that of all measurable wild animals together,
and—while human biomass continues to increase—that of wild animals is fall­
ing, largely as a result of human activities.
Although humans and other animals make up a small fraction of Earth’s
biomass, their existence depends completely on other forms of life. In the next
section, we shall see some of the ways that these different life-forms work together
to capture and recycle energy from Earth’s inanimate features.
Cells Can Be Powered by a Wide Variety of Free-Energy Sources
Organisms obtain the free energy needed for life in different ways. Some—such
as animals, fungi, and the many different bacteria that live in the human gut—
get it by feeding on other living things or the organic chemicals they produce;
such organisms are called organotrophic (from the Greek word trophe, meaning
archaea
7 Gt C
viruses
0.2 Gt C
plants
450 Gt C
bacteria
70 Gt C
protists
4 Gt C
fungi
12 Gt C
animals
2 Gt C
Figure 1–14 The distribution of living
biomass on Earth. The total biomass on
Earth expressed as gigatons of carbon
(Gt C) is estimated to be ∼550 Gt C. In
the graph shown, the area of each taxon
represented is proportional to the taxon’s
n1.103/1.14
global biomass, MBoC7
so plants
account for
about 80% (450/550) of the total biomass,
whereas animals account for 0.4% (2/550).
These recent estimates are based on
various advanced techniques, including
DNA sequencing and remote sensing.
(Adapted from Y.M. Bar-On et al., Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 115:6506–6511,
2018. With permission from the authors.)16
Chapter 1: Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life
“food”). Others derive their free energy directly from the nonliving world. These
primary energy converters fall into two classes: those that harvest the energy of
sunlight, and those that capture their energy from energy-rich systems of inor-
ganic chemicals in the environment (chemical systems that are far from chemical
equilibrium). Organisms of the former class are called phototrophic (feeding on
sunlight); those of the latter are called lithotrophic (feeding on rock). The organo-
trophic organisms like ourselves could not exist without these primary energy
converters, which are the most plentiful form of life.
The phototrophic organisms include many types of bacteria, as well as algae
and plants, on which we—and virtually all the living things that we ordinarily see
around us—depend. Phototrophic organisms have changed the whole chemistry
of our environment: as a prime example, the oxygen in Earth’s atmosphere is a
by-product of their biosynthetic activities.
Lithotrophic organisms are not such an obvious feature of our world,
because they are microscopic and mostly live in habitats that humans do not
frequent—deep in the ocean, buried in Earth’s crust, or in various other seem-
ingly inhospitable environments. But they are a major part of the living world, and
they are especially important in any consideration of the history of life on Earth.
Some lithotrophs get energy from aerobic reactions, which use molecular oxy-
gen from the environment; because atmospheric O2 is ultimately the product of
living phototrophic organisms, these aerobic lithotrophs are, in a sense, feeding
on the products of past life. There are, however, many other lithotrophs that live
anaerobically, in places where little or no molecular oxygen is present; these are
circumstances similar to those that existed in the early days of life on Earth, before
oxygen had accumulated.
The most dramatic of the anaerobic sites are the hot hydrothermal vents on
the floor of the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans. They are located where the ocean
floor is spreading as new portions of Earth’s crust form by a gradual upwelling
of material from Earth’s interior (Figure 1–15). Downward-percolating seawater
is heated and driven back upward as a submarine geyser, carrying with it a cur-
rent of chemicals from the hot rocks below. A typical cocktail might include H2S,
H2, CO, Mn2+, Fe2+, Ni2+, CH4, NH4+, and phosphorus-containing compounds.
SEA
dark cloud of
hot, mineral-rich
water
anaerobic lithotrophic
bacteria
invertebrate
animal community
hydrothermal
vent
chimney made from
precipitated metal
sulﬁdes
2–3°C
seaﬂoor
350°C
core
percolation
of seawater
hot mineral solution
hot basalt
Figure 1–15 The geology of a hot
hydrothermal vent in the ocean floor.
As indicated, seawater percolates down
toward the hot, molten, volcanic rock
upwelling (basalt) from Earth’s interior
and is heated and driven back upward,
carrying a mixture of minerals leached
from the hot rock. A temperature gradient
is set up, from more than 350°C near the
core of the vent, down to 2–3°C in the
surrounding ocean. Minerals precipitate
from the water as it cools, forming a
chimney. Different classes of organisms,
thriving at different temperatures, live in
different neighborhoods of the chimney. A
typical chimney might be a few meters tall,
spewing out hot, mineral-rich water. The
locations of lithotrophic bacteria and the
invertebrate marine animals that depend on
them are also shown (see Figure 1–16).17
GENOME DIVERSIFICATION AND THE TREE OF LIFE
Figure 1–16 Organisms living at a depth
of 2500 meters near a vent in the ocean
floor. Close to the vent, at temperatures
up to about 120°C, various lithotrophic
species of bacteria and archaea live,
directly fueled by geochemical energy. A
little further away, where the temperature
is lower, various invertebrate animals live
by feeding on these microorganisms. Most
remarkable are the giant (2-meter-long)
tube worms, Riftia pachyptila, which are
shown in the photograph. Rather than feed
on the lithotrophic microbes, these worms
live in symbiosis with them: specialized
organs in the worms harbor huge numbers
of symbiotic sulfur-oxidizing bacteria, which
harness geochemical energy and supply
nourishment to their hosts, which have
no mouth, gut, or anus. The tube worms
are thought to have evolved from more
conventional animals and to have become
secondarily adapted to life at hydrothermal
vents. (Science History Images/Alamy
Stock Photo.)
geochemical energy and
inorganic raw materials
bacteria and archaea
multicellular animals, e.g., tube worms
1m
A dense population of microorganisms lives in the neighborhood of the vent,
thriving on this austere diet and harvesting free energy from reactions between
the available chemicals. Various invertebrate marine animals—clams, mussels,
and giant marine worms—in turn, live off the microbes at the vent, forming an
m1.12/1.16
entire ecosystem analogous to MBoC7
the world
of plants and animals that we belong to,
but one powered by geochemical energy instead of light (Figure 1–16).
Some Cells Fix Nitrogen and Carbon Dioxide for Other Cells
To make a living cell requires matter, as well as free energy. DNA, RNA, and pro-
tein are composed of just six elements: hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, sulfur,
and phosphorus. These are all plentiful in the nonliving environment, in Earth’s
rocks, water, and atmosphere. But they are not present in chemical forms that
allow easy incorporation into biological molecules. Atmospheric N2 and CO2, in
particular, are extremely unreactive. A large amount of free energy is required to
drive the reactions that use these inorganic molecules to make the organic com-
pounds needed for further biosynthesis; that is, to fix nitrogen and carbon dioxide,
so as to make N and C available to living organisms. Many types of cells lack the
biochemical machinery to achieve this fixation; they instead rely on other classes
of cells to do the job for them. We animals depend on plants, directly or indirectly,
for our supplies of carbon- and nitrogen-containing organic compounds. Plants
in turn, although they can fix carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, lack the abil-
ity to fix atmospheric nitrogen; they depend in part on nitrogen-fixing bacteria
to supply their need for nitrogen-containing organic compounds. Plants of the
pea family, for example, harbor symbiotic nitrogen-fixing bacteria in nodules in
their roots.
Because living cells can differ widely in some of the most basic aspects of
their biochemistry, cells with complementary needs and capabilities have fre-
quently developed close associations. Some of these symbiotic associations, as
we will see later, have evolved to the point where the partners have lost their
separate identities altogether: they have joined forces to form a single composite
cell—an endosymbiotic association, as opposed to an ectosymbiotic one between
separate organisms.18
Chapter 1: Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life
Genomes Diversify Over Evolutionary Time, Producing New Types
of Organisms
Having discussed our current views on the diversity of life-forms, how they are
distributed across Earth, and how they depend on one another, we now turn to
the question of how this great diversity was generated. All life depends on the
storage of genetic information in the form of each organism’s DNA genome, so
our focus is on how genomes change over evolutionary time.
In storing and copying genetic information, random accidents and errors
occur, altering the nucleotide sequence; that is, creating mutations. Therefore,
when a cell divides, the genomes of its two daughters are often not quite identical
to each other or to that of the parent cell. On rare occasions, the error may repre-
sent a change for the better; more probably, it will cause no significant difference
in the cell’s prospects. But in some cases, the error will cause serious damage; for
example, by disrupting the coding sequence for a key protein or RNA molecule.
Changes due to mistakes of the first type will tend to be perpetuated, because
the altered cell has an increased likelihood of surviving and reproducing itself.
Changes due to mistakes of the second type—neutral changes—may be perpet-
uated or not: in the competition for limited resources, it is a matter of chance
whether the altered cell or its cousins will succeed. But changes that cause seri-
ous damage lead nowhere: the cell that suffers them dies, leaving no progeny.
Through endless repetition of this cycle of error and trial—of mutation and nat-
ural selection—organisms evolve: their genetic specifications change, sometimes
giving organisms new ways to exploit the environment more effectively, to survive
in competition with others, and to reproduce successfully.
Some parts of the genome will change more readily than others in the course
of evolution. A segment of DNA that does not code for protein or RNA and has no
significant regulatory role is free to change at a rate limited only by the frequency
of random errors. In contrast, a gene that codes for a highly optimized, essential
protein or RNA molecule cannot alter so easily: when mistakes occur, the faulty
cells are almost always disabled and eliminated. Genes of this latter sort are there-
fore highly conserved. Through 3.5 billion years or more of evolutionary history,
many DNA sequences have changed beyond all recognition, but the most highly
conserved genes remain perfectly recognizable in all living species.
These latter genes are the ones we must examine if we wish to trace family
relationships between the most distantly related organisms in the tree of life.
We discussed an example of one such gene—that for ribosomal RNA—when we
introduced the classification of the living world into the three domains of eukary-
otes, bacteria, and archaea. Because the production of proteins is fundamental to
all living cells, this component of the ribosome has been highly conserved since
early in the history of life on Earth (Figure 1–17).
The ribosomal RNA genes are exceptional in being so well conserved, whereas
most parts of genomes have diversified much more dramatically over evolutionary
time. A complete DNA sequence for an organism—its genome sequence—reveals
all the genes that an organism possesses, as well as those it lacks. When we
GTTCCGGGGGGAGTATGGTTGCAAAGCTGAAACTTAAAGGAATTGACGGAAGGGCACCACCAGGAGTGGAGCCTGCGGCTTAATTTGACTCAACACGGGAAACCTCACCChuman
GCCGCCTGGGGAGTACGGTCGCAAGACTGAAACTTAAAGGAATTGGCGGGGGAGCACTACAACGGGTGGAGCCTGCGGTTTAATTGGATTCAACGCCGGGCATCTTACCAMethanococcus
ACCGCCTGGGGAGTACGGCCGCAAGGTTAAAACTCAAATGAATTGACGGGGGCCCGC ACAAGCGGTGGAGCATGTGGTTTAATTCGATGCAACGCGAAGAACCTTACCTE. coli
GTTCCGGGGGGAGTATGGTTGCAAAGCTGAAACTTAAAGGAATTGACGGAAGGGCACCACCAGGAGTGGAGCCTGCGGCTTAATTTGACTCAACACGGGAAACCTCACCChuman
Figure 1–17 Genetic information conserved since the days of the last universal common ancestor of all living things.
A part of the gene that codes for the smaller of the two main ribosomal RNA (rRNA) molecules in the ribosome is shown. (The
complete molecule is about 1500–1900 nucleotides long, depending on the species.) Corresponding segments of nucleotide
sequences from an archaeon (Methanococcus jannaschii), a bacterium (Escherichia coli), and a eukaryote (Homo sapiens)
are aligned. The red vertical lines indicate sites where the nucleotides are identical between the species; the human sequence
is repeated at the bottom of the alignment so that all three two-way comparisons can be seen. The black dot halfway along
the E. coli sequence denotes a site where a nucleotide has been either deleted from the bacterial lineage in the course of
evolution or inserted in the other two lineages. Note that the sequences from these three organisms, representative of the
three domains of the living world, still retain unmistakable similarities.
MBoC7 m1.18/1.1719
GENOME DIVERSIFICATION AND THE TREE OF LIFE
compare the three domains of the living world, we can begin to see which genes
are common to all of them—and must therefore have been present in the last
universal common ancestral cell that was the founder of all present-day living
things. We can also identify those genes that are peculiar to a single branch in the
tree of life. To explain such findings, we need to consider how new genes arise
and, more generally, how genomes evolve.
New Genes Are Generated from Preexisting Genes
The raw material of evolution is the DNA sequence that already exists: there is no
natural mechanism for making long stretches of new, random, DNA sequence. In
this sense, no gene is ever entirely new. Innovation can, however, occur in several
ways (Figure 1–18):
1. Intragenic mutation: an existing gene can be randomly modified by
changes in its DNA sequence, through various types of errors that occur in
the process of DNA replication and DNA repair.
2. Gene duplication: an existing gene can be accidentally duplicated, creating
a pair of initially identical genes within a single cell; these two genes may
then diverge in the course of evolution.
3. DNA segment shuffling: two or more existing genes can break and rejoin to
make a hybrid gene consisting of DNA segments that originally belonged
to separate genes.
4. Horizontal (intercellular) DNA transfer: a piece of DNA can be transferred
from the genome of one cell to that of another—including between species.
This process contrasts with the usual vertical transfer of genetic informa-
tion from parent to progeny.
ORIGINAL GENOME
GENETIC INNOVATION
INTRAGENIC
MUTATION
mutation
1
gene
GENE
DUPLICATION
+
2
gene A
+
3
DNA SEGMENT
SHUFFLING
+
gene B
organism A
4
+
HORIZONTAL
DNA TRANSFER
organism B
organism B with
new gene
Figure 1–18 Four modes of genetic
innovation and their effects on the DNA
sequence of an organism. A special
form of horizontal transfer occurs when
cells of two different species enter into a
permanent symbiotic association; genes
from one of the cells may subsequently be
transferred to the genome of the other, as
we will see later when we discuss the likely
evolutionary origins of mitochondria and
chloroplasts.20
Chapter 1: Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life
283 genes in families with
38–77 gene members
764 genes in families with
4–19 gene members
273 genes in families
with 3 gene members
2126 genes with
no family relationship
568 genes in families
with 2 gene members
Each of these types of change leaves a characteristic trace in the DNA sequence
of the organism, and there is clear evidence that all four processes have occurred
frequently during evolution. In Chapters 4 and 5, we discuss the mechanisms
underlying these changes, but for the present we focus on the consequences.
Gene Duplications Give Rise
to Families of Related Genes Within a
MBoC7 m1.20/1.19
Single Genome
A cell duplicates its entire genome each time it divides into two daughter cells.
However, accidents occasionally result in the inappropriate duplication of just
part of the genome, with retention of both the original and duplicate segments
in a single cell. Once a gene has been duplicated in this way (see mode 2 in
Figure 1–18), the two gene copies can acquire mutations and become specialized
to perform different functions within the same cell and its descendants. Repeated
rounds of this process of gene duplication and divergence, over many millions
of years, have enabled one gene to give rise to a family of related genes within a
single genome. Analysis of the DNA sequence of prokaryotic genomes reveals
many examples of such gene families: in the bacterium Bacillus subtilis, for
example, 47% of the genes have one or more obvious relatives (Figure 1–19).
The above evolutionary process must be distinguished from the genetic diver-
gence that occurs when one species of organism splits into two separate lines of
descent at a branch point in the family tree—when the human line separated from
that of chimpanzees, for example. In the latter case, the genes gradually become
different in the course of evolution, but they are likely to continue to have corre-
sponding functions in the two sister species. Genes that are related by descent in
this way—that is, genes in two separate species that derive from the same ances-
tral gene in the last common ancestor of those two species—are called orthologs.
Related genes that have resulted from a gene duplication event within a single
genome—and are likely to have diverged in their function—are called paralogs.
Genes that are related by descent in either way are called homologs, a general
term used to cover both types of relationship (Figure 1–20).
The Function of a Gene Can Often Be Deduced from Its
Nucleotide Sequence
Family relationships among genes are important not just for their evolutionary
interest, but also because they simplify the task of deciphering gene functions.
Once the nucleotide sequence of a newly discovered gene has been deter-
mined, a scientist can tap a few keys on a computer to search large databases of
known gene sequences for gene relatives. In many cases, the function of one or
more of these homologs will have been already determined experimentally—
generally in one of the model organisms described later in this chapter. Because
gene sequence determines gene function, one can frequently make a good
guess at the new gene’s function, as it is likely to be similar to that of the already
Figure 1–19 Families of evolutionarily
related genes in the genome of Bacillus
subtilis. The largest gene family in this
bacterium consists of 77 genes coding for
varieties of a class of membrane transport
proteins called ABC transporters, which
are found in all three domains of the living
world. (Adapted from F. Kunst et al., Nature
390:249–256, 1997.)21
GENOME DIVERSIFICATION AND THE TREE OF LIFE
ancestral organism
ancestral organism
gene G
gene G
SPECIATION TO GIVE TWO
SEPARATE SPECIES
species Aspecies B
gene GAgene GB
GENE DUPLICATION
AND DIVERGENCE
later organism
gene G1
gene G2
genes GA and GB are orthologs
(A)
genes G1 and G2 are paralogs
(B)
known homologs. In this way, it is possible to decipher a great deal about the
biology of an organism simply by analyzing the DNA sequence of its genome.
MBoC7 m1.21/1.20
More Than 200 Gene Families Are Common to All Three Domains
of Life
Given the complete genome sequences of representative organisms from all three
domains of life—eukaryotes, bacteria, and archaea—we can search systemat-
ically for homologies that span this enormous evolutionary divide. In this way,
we can begin to take stock of the common inheritance of all living things. There
are considerable difficulties in this enterprise. For example, individual species
have often lost some of the ancestral genes, and other genes have almost cer-
tainly been acquired by horizontal transfer from another species and therefore
are not truly ancestral. In fact, genome comparisons strongly suggest that both
lineage-specific gene loss and horizontal gene transfer, in some cases between
evolutionarily distant species, have been major factors in evolution, at least
among bacteria and archaea. As an additional difficulty, in the course of 2 or
3 billion years, some genes that were initially shared will have changed beyond
recognition through mutation.
Because of all these vagaries of the evolutionary process, it is difficult, if
not impossible, to determine the ancestral gene set that diversified into the
present-day variety of life. A crude approximation can be obtained by tallying
the gene families that have representatives in multiple—but not necessarily all—
species from the three major domains of life. One such analysis revealed 264
ancient conserved families, each of which could be assigned a function on the
basis of the best-characterized family member. As shown in Table 1–1, the larg-
est number of shared gene families were involved in translation and in amino
acid metabolism and transport. However, it must be emphasized that this set
of highly conserved gene families represents only a very rough sketch of the
common inheritance of all modern life.
Summary
For most of human history, the living world around us was classified by what
we could see. Genome sequencing has radically changed our view of life on the
planet, and we now realize that living things fall into three broad domains: bac-
teria, archaea, and eukaryotes. The organisms in the first two domains are largely
invisible to our naked eye, and many of them cannot yet be grown in a laboratory—
being known only by their DNA sequences. But they make up the vast majority of
life’s evolutionary diversity, including species that can obtain all their energy and
nutrients from inorganic chemical sources—such as the reactive mixtures of min-
erals released at hydrothermal vents on the ocean floor—the sort of diet that may
Figure 1–20 Two types of gene
homology based on different
evolutionary pathways. (A) Orthologs.
(B) Paralogs. Genes related by either
mechanism are called homologs.22
Chapter 1: Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life
TABLE 1–1 The Number of Gene Families, Classified by Function, Common to All Three Domains of the Living World
Information processing
Metabolism
Translation63Energy production and conversion19
Transcription7Carbohydrate transport and metabolism16
DNA replication, recombination, and repair13Amino acid transport and metabolism43
Nucleotide transport and metabolism15
Cellular processes and signaling
Cell-cycle control, mitosis, and meiosis2Coenzyme transport and metabolism22
Defense mechanisms3Lipid transport and metabolism9
Signal-transduction mechanisms1Inorganic ion transport and metabolism8
Cell wall/membrane biogenesis2Secondary metabolite biosynthesis,
transport, and catabolism5
Intracellular trafficking and secretion4Post-translational modification, protein
turnover, chaperones8
Poorly characterized
General biochemical function predicted;
specific biological role unknown
24
For the purpose of this analysis, gene families are defined as “universal” if they are represented in the genomes of at least two diverse archaea
(Archaeoglobus fulgidus and Aeropyrum pernix), two evolutionarily distant bacteria (Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis), and one eukaryote
(yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae). (Data from R.L. Tatusov et al., Science 278:631–637, 1997; R.L. Tatusov et al., BMC Bioinformatics 4:41,
2003; and the COGs database at the US National Library of Medicine.)
have nourished the first living cells more than 3.5 billion years ago. The eukary-
otes (whose cells are larger and contain a variety of membrane-bound organelles)
evolved later in evolutionary history and are consequently less diverse as a group
than either the bacteria or archaea. Eukaryotes, which include all plants and
animals, are the organisms most familiar to us, and they are the main focus of
this textbook.
Many of the genes within a single organism or species show strong family
resemblances in their DNA sequences, implying that they originated from the same
ancestral gene through gene duplication and divergence. Family resemblances
(homologies) are also clear when gene sequences are compared between different
species, and more than 200 gene families have been so highly conserved that they
can be recognized as common to most species from all three domains of the living
world, suggesting they were present in the ancestral cell from which all life evolved.
Given the DNA sequence of a newly discovered gene in any organism, it is therefore
often possible to deduce the gene’s function from the known function of a homolo-
gous gene in a better-studied organism.
EUKARYOTES AND THE ORIGIN
OF THE EUKARYOTIC CELL
Eukaryotic cells, in general, are bigger and more elaborate than bacterial and
archaeal cells, and their genomes are bigger and more elaborate, too. The greater
cell size is accompanied by radical differences in cell structure and function: in
particular, eukaryotes contain a diverse set of intracellular organelles—discrete
membrane-enclosed subcompartments and large membraneless macromolecu-
lar assemblies—each with a distinct composition and function. Some eukaryotic
cells live independent lives as single-cell organisms. Others live in multicellular
assemblies—indeed, all of the more complex multicellular organisms on Earth,
including plants, animals, and fungi, are formed from eukaryotic cells.
We begin by discussing how eukaryotic cells are organized and how they
might have evolved from more ancient prokaryotes. We then briefly consider how
eukaryotic genomes differ from those of prokaryotes, as well as how the cells in23
EUKARYOTES AND THE ORIGIN OF THE EUKARYOTIC CELL
multicellular organisms become differently specialized as an embryo develops,
so as to contribute to the welfare of the organism as a whole.
Eukaryotic Cells Contain a Variety of Organelles
By definition, eukaryotic cells keep almost all their DNA in a membrane-enclosed
internal compartment—the nucleus, which is usually the most conspicuous organ-
elle (Figure 1–21). The long DNA polymers in the nucleus are packaged with
proteins to form chromosomes, which only become visible in a light microscope
when they condense in preparation for cell division. The nuclear envelope, a double
layer of membrane, surrounds the nucleus and separates the nuclear DNA from the
cytoplasm, which, in a eukaryotic cell, includes everything between the plasma mem-
brane and the nucleus. As shown in the figure, the nuclear envelope is perforated by
nuclear pores, which are channels formed by protein complexes that mediate the
two-way traffic of large molecules between the nucleus and the cytoplasm.
Eukaryotic cells have many other features that set them apart from bacterial
and archaeal cells. They are typically 10–30 times bigger in linear dimension and
1000–10,000 times larger in volume than a typical prokaryotic cell. They have an
elaborate cytoskeleton in the cytoplasm, consisting of several types of protein
filaments (see Figure 1–21) that, together with the many proteins that attach to
them, form a network of girders, ropes, and motors that gives the cell mechanical
strength and performs various other functions: when the cell divides, for exam-
ple, the cytoskeleton reorganizes and pulls the replicated chromosomes apart
and distributes them equally to the two daughter cells. In the case of animal cells
and some free-living, single-cell eukaryotes, the cytoskeleton controls cell shape
centrosome with
pair of centrioles
microtubule
extracellular matrix
chromatin (DNA)
nuclear pore
nuclear
envelope
vesicles
lysosome
mitochondrion
5 µm
actin
filaments
nucleolus
endoplasmic
reticulum
plasma
membrane
peroxisome
ribosomes in
cytosol
nucleus
Golgi
apparatus
intermediate
filaments
Figure 1–21 The major features of eukaryotic cells. The drawing depicts the major contents of a typical animal cell seen in
cross section, but almost all the same components are found in plant cells and fungi, as well as in single-cell eukaryotes. The
cytoskeleton (discussed in Chapter 16) consists of three types of protein filaments: actin filaments (red), microtubules (green),
and intermediate filaments (blue). Plant cells (not shown) contain chloroplasts in addition to the components shown here; they
also have a rigid external cell wall that contains cellulose surrounding their plasma membrane, which means they are largely
MBoC7 m1.25/1.21
immobile. The interior of cells is, in reality, much more crowded
than depicted in this simplified diagram.24
Chapter 1: Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life
Figure 1–22 Phagocytosis. An electron
micrograph of a mammalian phagocytic
white blood cell (a neutrophil) ingesting a
bacterium that is in the process of dividing.
Only the part of the cell that is extending
surface protrusions to engulf the bacterium
is shown. (Courtesy of Dorothy Bainton.)
cell surface protrusions
dividing
bacterium
plasma
membrane
phagocytic
white blood cell
1 µm
and drives and guides cell movements (Movie 1.1). Lacking the kind of tough
cell wall characteristic of bacteria and archaea, these eukaryotic cells can change
their shape rapidly, in some cases enabling them to move and engulf other cells
and small objects by a process called phagocytosis (Figure 1–22).
There are many other membrane-enclosed organelles in eukaryotic cells.
e15.32/1.22
Unlike the nucleus, most of themMBoC7
are enclosed
by single membranes. The most
extensive organelle is the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), which is where most cell
membrane components are made, along with materials destined for secretion to
the outside of the cell. The Golgi apparatus receives these molecules from the ER
and modifies and packages them for secretion or transport to another cell com-
partment. Lysosomes are small irregularly shaped organelles in which intracellular
digestion occurs. Peroxisomes are small vesicles where hydrogen peroxide is used
to inactivate toxic molecules.
A continual exchange of materials occurs between these single-membrane-
enclosed organelles, mediated mainly by small transport vesicles that pinch off
from the membrane of one organelle and fuse with that of another. To connect the
eukaryotic cell with its surroundings, a similar vesicle-mediated exchange goes
on continually at the cell surface. Here, portions of the plasma membrane pinch
in to form intracellular vesicles that carry material captured from the external
medium into the cell—a process called endocytosis; and in the reverse process,
called exocytosis, vesicles from inside the cell fuse with the plasma membrane
and release their contents to the exterior (Figure 1–23).
Besides the nucleus, there are two other eukaryotic cell organelles that are
enclosed in double membranes—mitochondria and, in plant cells and algae,
chloroplasts. Mitochondria take up oxygen and harness energy from the oxi-
dation of food molecules, such as sugars and fats, to produce most of the ATP
(adenosine triphosphate) that powers the cell’s activities. Chloroplasts perform
photosynthesis in plant cells and algae, using the energy of sunlight to synthe-
size carbohydrates from atmospheric CO2 and water, delivering these energy-rich
products to the host cell as food. In many eukaryotic cells, roughly half of the
cytoplasm is occupied by membrane-enclosed organelles. The surrounding fluid
is called the cytosol. It contains ribosomes, which translate RNAs into proteins,
and it is also where most of the cell’s other metabolic reactions take place.
In addition to the membrane-enclosed organelles just described, eukary-
otic cells contain a variety of smaller organelles that lack membranes. Instead,
IMPORT BY ENDOCYTOSIS
endosome
plasma
membrane
Golgi
apparatus
EXPORT BY EXOCYTOSIS
Figure 1–23 Endocytosis and exocytosis
across the plasma membrane. Eukaryotic
cells import extracellular materials by
endocytosis and secrete intracellular
MBoC7 e1.25/1.23
materials by exocytosis. The endocytosed
material is first delivered to single-
membrane-enclosed organelles called
endosomes, discussed in Chapter 12.EUKARYOTES AND THE ORIGIN OF THE EUKARYOTIC CELL
mitochondrion
lysosome
peroxisome
cytosol
Golgi
apparatus
nuclear
envelope
transport
vesicle
25
Figure 1–24 Membrane-enclosed
organelles are distributed throughout
the eukaryotic cell cytoplasm. The
membrane-enclosed organelles, shown
in different colors, are each specialized to
perform a different function. The cytoplasm
that fills the space outside of these
organelles is called the cytosol.
endoplasmic
reticulum
endosome
multiple components that work together are held in close proximity in bio-
molecular condensates, which will be described in Chapters 3, 6, and 12. An
example is the nucleolus, where ribosome assembly takes place (see Figure 1–21).
Figure 1–24 summarizes the membrane-enclosed organelles in eukaryotic cells,
each of which will be discussed in detail in later chapters.
e1.24/1.24
Mitochondria Evolved fromMBoC7
a Symbiotic
Bacterium Captured
by an Ancient Archaeon
A fundamental question in both evolution and cell biology is how did the first
eukaryotic cell arise? The evidence suggests that it happened when an archaeal
and a bacterial cell merged about 2 billion years ago, in a world that had con-
tained only prokaryotes for more than 1.5 billion years.
All eukaryotic cells contain (or at one time did contain) mitochondria
(Figure 1–25). Mitochondria are similar in size to small bacteria, and both repro-
duce by dividing. The mitochondria contain their own DNA, with genes that
resemble bacterial genes; they also contain their own ribosomes and translation
factors that resemble those in bacteria. These and other similarities between
mitochondria and present-day bacteria provide strong evidence that mito-
chondria evolved from an aerobic bacterium (one that harvested energy by
combining electrons derived from foodstuffs with oxygen gas) that was captured
(A)
(B)
100 nm
Figure 1–25 A mitochondrion. (A) An
electron micrograph of the organelle
seen in cross section. (B) A drawing of
a mitochondrion with part of it cut away
to show the three-dimensional structure
(Movie 1.2). Note the smooth outer
membrane and the convoluted inner
membrane, which houses the proteins that
generate ATP from the oxidation of food
molecules. (A, courtesy of Daniel S. Friend
and by permission of E.L. Bearer.)26
Chapter 1: Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life
Figure 1–26 A scanning electron micrograph of an Asgard archaeon in culture. This anaerobic
cell proliferates very slowly, doubling only about every 20 days (compared to every half hour or
so for the bacterium E. coli). It can be seen to extend elaborate membranous protrusions from its
surface—including “blebs” and unique branched and unbranched structures. These protrusions
are intimately associated with two other species—one bacterial, one archaeal—that were isolated
with the Asgard strain as ectosymbionts, as indicated. The scientists had maintained the deep
marine sediment under anaerobic conditions in a bioreactor for more than 2000 days, mimicking
conditions of the seabed, and they attempted to culture samples from this bioreactor under a range
of different conditions. Only after many years and repeated subculturing were they able to isolate
this archaeon with its ectosymbionts. (From H. Imachi et al., Nature 577:519–525, 2020.)
by an anaerobic cell. These two cells (and their descendants) were then able
to evolve an endosymbiotic relationship, providing mutual metabolic support
within a common cytoplasm.
There are also good reasons to believe that the ancestral capturing cell was an
archaeon. As we have seen, the genomes of present-day archaea encode many
proteins that are characteristic of present-day eukaryotic cells. Those archaea
with the most eukaryotic-like genes belong to the Asgard lineage, first identified
by sequencing DNA fragments obtained from the seabed. But no living example
had been seen or cultivated—until very recently, when, after a heroic 12-year-
long isolation procedure, the first Asgard archaeon was propagated in culture.
This remarkable, living, anaerobic archaeon looked like no other prokaryote—
having long branching protrusions—and it seemed to live in an ectosymbiotic
relationship with another bacterium and another archaeon, both of which were
isolated with it (Figure 1–26). The discovery of the strange Asgard archaeon pro-
vides a glimpse of how an ancient archaeon might eventually have captured an
aerobic bacterium to initiate the eukaryotic lineage, with a hypothetical pathway
being illustrated in Figure 1–27 and discussed in detail in Chapter 12.
archaeon
cell body
archaeon
cell protrusions
ectosymbionts
1 µm
MBoC7 n1.101/1.26
Chloroplasts Evolved from a Symbiotic Photosynthetic Bacterium
Engulfed by an Ancient Eukaryotic Cell
Chloroplasts (Figure 1–28) perform photosynthesis in plant cells and algae, using
the energy of sunlight to synthesize their own “food” (in the form of carbohy-
drates) from atmospheric CO2 and water. Like mitochondria, they are enclosed in
double membranes, have their own “circular” genomes, and reproduce by divid-
ing. They almost certainly evolved from a symbiotic photosynthetic bacterium
that was captured by an ancient eukaryotic cell that already possessed mitochon-
dria. This bacterium may have been captured by phagocytosis, a frequent process
in eukaryotes (see Figure 1–22).
Whereas some single-cell eukaryotes are hunters that live by capturing
other cells and eating them (see Figure 1–34), a eukaryotic cell equipped with
chloroplasts has no need to chase after other cells as prey; it is nourished by the
captive chloroplasts it has inherited from its ancient eukaryotic ancestors. Cor-
respondingly, plant cells, although they possess the cytoskeletal equipment for
movement, have lost the ability to change shape rapidly and to engulf other cells
archaeon DNA
bacterial
ectosymbiont
DNA
expanded archaeal
protrusions
surface
protrusions
bacterial
endosymbiont
ENCLOSURE OF ECTOSYMBIONT
BY ARCHAEAL MEMBRANE FUSION
forming nuclear
envelope
forming
endoplasmic reticulum
ESCAPE OF ENDOSYMBIONT INTO CYTOSOL
AND FORMATION OF NEW INTRACELLULAR
COMPARTMENTS
Figure 1–27 A possible model for some
early steps in eukaryotic cell evolution.
In this model, the surface protrusions of
an ancient Asgard archaeon expanded
and surrounded an ectosymbiotic aerobic
bacterium to create a symbiotic relationship
between the two types of cells. Eventually,
the protrusions fused with one another,
trapping the bacterium as an endosymbiont
in the archaeon cytoplasm, where it was
initially enclosed by an internal membrane
derived from the archaeon’s plasma
membrane (the bacterium itself retaining
its own membranes). At some point, the
endosymbiont escaped from the enclosing
archaeon-derived membrane and entered
the cytosol, where it eventually evolved
into a mitochondrion—with both its DNA
and membranes derived from the engulfed
bacterium. As shown, it is postulated
that the internal archaeon membranes
generated by this mechanism of protrusion
expansion and fusion progressively formed
both the nucleus and single-membrane-
enclosed organelles, such as the
endoplasmic reticulum. The evidence
for this general type of model of eukaryotic-
cell evolution is discussed further in
Chapter 12. (Adapted from H. Imachi
et al., Nature 577:519–525, 2020, and
from D.A. Baum and B. Baum, BMC Biol.
12:76–92, 2014.)27
EUKARYOTES AND THE ORIGIN OF THE EUKARYOTIC CELL
chloroplasts
chlorophyll-
containing
internal
membranes
Figure 1–28 Chloroplasts. In plant
cells and single-celled photosynthetic
eukaryotes, these organelles capture
the energy of sunlight. (A) A light
micrograph of a single cell isolated from
a leaf of a flowering plant, showing
the green chloroplasts (Movie 1.3 and
see Movie 14.10). (B) A drawing of one
chloroplast, showing the highly folded
system of internal membranes containing
the chlorophyll molecules that absorb light.
(A, courtesy of Preeti Dahiya.)
inner
membrane
outer
membrane
(A)
(B)
10 µ m
by phagocytosis. Instead, they wrap themselves in a tough, protective cell wall. If
some eukaryotic cells can be viewed as hunters, then one might view plant cells
as having given up hunting for farming.
Fungi represent yet another eukaryotic way of life. Fungal cells, like animal
cells, possess mitochondria but not chloroplasts; they have a tough outer wall
that limits their ability to move rapidly
or to take up other cells. Fungi, it seems,
MBoC7 m1.30/1.28
have turned from hunters into scavengers. Other cells secrete nutrient molecules
or release them after death, and fungi feed on these leavings—often performing
whatever digestion is necessary extracellularly, by secreting digestive enzymes to
the exterior.
Eukaryotes Have Hybrid Genomes
As just discussed, the genetic information of eukaryotic cells has a hybrid origin—
from an ancestral anaerobic archaeon and from the bacteria it adopted as endo-
symbionts (Figure 1–29). Most of this genetic information (DNA) is stored in the
nucleus, although a small amount remains inside the organelles that evolved
nonphotosynthetic
bacteria
photosynthetic
bacteria
plants
animals
chloroplasts
TIME
single-celled eukaryote
mitochondria
bacteria
archaea
ancestral prokaryote
fungi
archaea
Figure 1–29 A model for the evolution
of eukaryotic cells in the tree of life. All
living cells are thought to have evolved
from an ancestral prokaryotic cell (the
last universal common ancestor)
between 3.5 and 3.8 billion years ago).
Many millions of years later, it seems an
anaerobic archaeon acquired an aerobic
bacterial symbiont, which evolved into
mitochondria (see Figure 1–27). Later still,
a mitochondria-containing eukaryotic cell
acquired a photosynthetic bacterium, which
evolved into chloroplasts. Mitochondria are
essentially the same in plants, animals, and
fungi, indicating that they were acquired
before these three lineages diverged about
1.5 billion years ago.28
Chapter 1: Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life
from the captured bacteria—the mitochondria and, in plant and algal cells, the
chloroplasts. When the mitochondrial DNA and the chloroplast DNA are sepa-
rated from the nuclear DNA and individually sequenced, both the mitochondrial
and chloroplast genomes are found to be cut-down versions of the corresponding
bacterial genomes: in a human cell, for example, the mitochondrial genome con-
sists of only 16,569 nucleotide pairs, and it codes for only 13 proteins plus a set of
24 RNAs involved in protein synthesis.
Many of the genes that are missing from the mitochondria and chloroplasts
have not been lost; instead, they have moved from the endosymbiont genomes
into the DNA of the host-cell nucleus. Thus the nuclear DNA of animals contains
many genes coding for proteins that serve essential functions inside the mito-
chondria; in plants and algae, the nuclear DNA contains many genes specifying
proteins required in chloroplasts. In both cases, the DNA sequences of these
nuclear genes still show clear evidence of their bacterial origins.
Eukaryotic Genomes Are Big
Natural selection has evidently favored mitochondria with small genomes. By
contrast, the nuclear genomes of most eukaryotes seem to have been free to
enlarge. Perhaps the eukaryotic way of life has made large size an advantage:
predatory cells, for example, typically need to be bigger than their prey, and cell
size generally increases in proportion to genome size. Whatever the reason, the
genomes of most eukaryotes have become hundreds of times larger than those of
bacteria and archaea (Figure 1–30).
The freedom to be extravagant with DNA has had profound implications.
Eukaryotes not only have more genes than prokaryotes; they also have vastly
more DNA that does not code for protein or RNA. The human genome contains
about 700 times as many nucleotide pairs as the genome of a typical bacterium
such as E. coli, but it contains only about 4.5 times as many protein-coding
genes because a much greater proportion of the human genome does not code
for protein (∼98.5% compared to 11% in E. coli). The estimated genome sizes
and gene numbers for a few selected eukaryotes are compared with the bacte-
rium E. coli in Table 1–2; we will discuss shortly how each of these organisms
serves as a model organism.
Eukaryotic Genomes Are Rich in Regulatory DNA
As discussed in Chapter 4, much of our nonprotein-coding DNA is almost cer-
tainly dispensable “junk,” retained during evolution like a mass of old papers
because, when there is little pressure to keep an archive small, it is easier to retain
E. coli
BACTERIA
Halobacterium sp.
ARCHAEA
malarial parasite
PROTOZOANS
FUNGI
amoeba
yeast (S. cerevisiae)
wheat
Arabidopsis
PLANTS, ALGAE
NEMATODE WORMS
Caenorhabditis
shrimp
Drosophila
CRUSTACEANS, INSECTS
AMPHIBIANS, FISHES
zebrafish
MAMMALS, BIRDS, REPTILES
105
106
107
frog
newt
human
108
109
1010
nucleotide pairs per haploid genome
1011
1012
Figure 1–30 Genome sizes compared.
Genome size is measured in nucleotide
(base) pairs of DNA per haploid genome,
that is, per single copy of the genome.
(The body cells of sexually reproducing,
multicellular organisms such as ourselves
are generally diploid: they contain two
copies of the genome, one inherited from
the mother, the other from the father.)
Note that closely related organisms can
vary widely in the quantity of DNA in their
genomes (as indicated by the length of
the green bars), even though they contain
similar numbers of protein-coding genes.
(Data from T.R. Gregory, 2021. Animal
Genome Size Database: www.genomesize
.com.)29
EUKARYOTES AND THE ORIGIN OF THE EUKARYOTIC CELL
TABLE 1–2 Some Model Organisms and Their Genomes
Approximate genome
size* (nucleotide
pairs)Approximate number
of protein-coding
genes**
Escherichia coli (bacterium)4.6 × 1064300
Saccharomyces cerevisiae (yeast)12.5 × 1066600
Caenorhabditis elegans
(roundworm)100 × 10620,000
Arabidopsis thaliana (plant)135 × 10627,000
Drosophila melanogaster (fruit fly)180 × 10614,000
Danio rerio (zebrafish)1400 × 10626,000
Mus musculus (mouse)2800 × 10620,000
Homo sapiens (human)3100 × 10620,000
Organism
*Genome size includes an estimate for the amount of highly repeated, noncoding DNA
sequence, which does not appear in genome databases.
**There are also genes that code for functional RNA molecules that do not code for proteins.
everything than to sort out the valuable information and discard the rest. Certain
exceptional eukaryotic species, such as the puffer fish, bear witness to the prof-
ligacy of their relatives; they have somehow managed to rid themselves of large
quantities of nonprotein-coding DNA, and, yet, they appear similar in structure,
behavior, and fitness to related species that have vastly more such DNA.
Even in compact eukaryotic genomes such as that of the puffer fish, there is
more nonprotein-coding DNA than protein-coding DNA. As in all eukaryotic
organisms, at least some of the noncoding DNA certainly has important func-
tions. In particular, it regulates the expression of genes. With this regulatory DNA,
eukaryotes have evolved distinctive, highly sophisticated ways of controlling
when and where a gene is brought into play. Elaborate mechanisms for gene
regulation are especially crucial for the formation and function of complex mul-
ticellular organisms, which have many different cell types, each with different
functions, as we now discuss.
Eukaryotic Genomes Define the Program of Multicellular
Development
The cells in an individual animal or plant are extraordinarily varied. Blood cells,
skin cells, bone cells, nerve cells—they seem as dissimilar as any cells could be
(Figure 1–31). Yet all these cell types are the descendants of a single fertilized egg
cell, and all (with very minor exceptions) contain identical copies of the genome
of the species.
The differences result from the way in which the cells make selective use
of their genetic instructions according to their developmental history and the
cues they receive from their surroundings in a developing embryo. The DNA is
not just a shopping list specifying the molecules that every cell must have, and the
cell is not an assembly of all the items on the list. Rather, the cell behaves as a mul-
tipurpose machine, with sensors to receive environmental signals and with highly
developed abilities to call different sets of genes into action according to signals it
receives. The genome in each cell is big enough to accommodate the information
that specifies an entire multicellular organism, but in any individual cell only part
of that information is used.
Many genes in the eukaryotic genome code for proteins that regulate the
activities of other genes, a topic discussed in detail in Chapter 7. Most of these
regulatory genes encode transcription regulators that act by binding, directly or
neuron
neutrophil
25 µ m
Figure 1–31 Cell types can vary
enormously in size and shape. A human
nerve cell is compared here with a human
neutrophil, a type of white blood cell. Both
are drawn to scale.
MBoC7 m1.33/1.3130
Chapter 1: Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life
Figure 1–32 Genetic control of the
program of multicellular development.
The role of a regulatory gene is
demonstrated in the snapdragon
Antirrhinum. In this example, a mutation
in a single gene coding for a regulatory
protein causes leafy shoots to develop in
place of flowers: because the regulator
protein has been changed, the cells adopt
characters that would be appropriate to a
different location in the normal plant. The
mutant is on the left, the normal plant on
the right. (Courtesy of Enrico Coen and
Rosemary Carpenter.)
indirectly, to the many different DNA sequences that control which genes are to
be expressed, and at what levels. Eukaryotic genomes also produce many noncod-
MBoC7
m1.34/1.32
ing RNA molecules; as the name
implies,
they are not translated into protein but
control gene expression in a variety of ways. The expanded genome of eukaryotes
therefore not only specifies the hardware of the cell but also stores the software
that controls how that hardware is used (Figure 1–32).
Cells do not just passively receive signals; rather, they actively exchange signals
with their neighbors. Thus, in a developing multicellular organism, an internal
control system governs each cell that has different consequences depending on
the messages exchanged. The outcome, astonishingly, is a precisely patterned
array of cells of different types, each displaying a character appropriate to its posi-
tion in the multicellular structure.
Many Eukaryotes Live as Solitary Cells
Many species of eukaryotic cells lead a solitary life. As we have seen, some of
these single-cell organisms are hunters, some are photosynthesizers, still oth-
ers are scavengers. Figure 1–33 conveys something of the astonishing variety of
single-cell eukaryotes, whose anatomy can be remarkably elaborate, including
Figure 1–33 An assortment of single-cell
eukaryotes. The drawings are done to
different scales, but in each case the scale
bar represents 10 μm. The organisms
in (A), (C), and (G) are ciliates; (B) is a
heliozoan; (D) is an amoeba; (E) is a
dinoflagellate; and (F) is a euglenoid.
(Courtesy of Michael Sleigh, from M.A.
Sleigh, Biology of Protozoa. Edinburgh:
Edward Arnold, 1973.)
(D)
(A)
(B)
(C)
(E)
(F)
(G)31
MODEL ORGANISMS
(A)
(B)
100 µ m
such structures as sensory bristles, photoreceptors, sinuously beating cilia, leglike
appendages, mouth parts, stinging darts, and muscle-like contractile bundles.
Although they are single cells, they can be as intricate, as versatile, and as com-
plex in their behavior as many multicellular organisms (Figure 1–34, Movie 1.4,
and Movie 1.5).
Humans tend to focus on plants and animals, while neglecting single-cell
eukaryotes because (along with bacteria and archaea) they are microscopic.
MBoC7 m1.27/1.34
But thanks to DNA comparisons, we now know that the genomes of single-cell
eukaryotes are far more evolutionarily diverse than those of multicellular animals
and plants, meaning that animals and plants arose relatively late in the complex
and fascinating eukaryotic pedigree. With genome data, we can position the
many different single-celled eukaryotes in the tree of life and identify our closest
relatives (Figure 1–35). Scientists are using this information to probe the origins
of multicellularity, with a focus on what these strange creatures can tell us about
our own evolutionary past.
Summary
Eukaryotic cells, by definition, keep most of their DNA in a separate membrane-
enclosed compartment—the nucleus. They have, in addition, an elaborate set of
other organelles, each carrying out different functions, such as the oxidation of
food-derived molecules and production of ATP in mitochondria. Eukaryotic cells
also contain a cytoskeleton for structural support and movements. There is com-
pelling evidence that mitochondria and, in plants and algae, chloroplasts evolved
from captured symbiotic bacteria, which explains why these organelles contain
their own DNA and ribosomes.
Eukaryotic cells typically have 3–8 times as many protein-coding genes as bacte-
ria and archaea and often a thousand times more noncoding DNA. Although much
of this DNA is probably unimportant, some of it allows for great complexity in the
regulation of gene expression, as required for the construction of complex multicel-
lular organisms containing many different cell types.
MODEL ORGANISMS
Because all cells appear to have descended from a common ancestor, whose
fundamental properties have been conserved through evolution, the knowledge
gained from the study of one organism contributes to our understanding of all
others, including ourselves. It turns out that certain organisms are much more
accessible than others for study in the laboratory. Some reproduce rapidly and
Figure 1–34 A single-cell eukaryote
that eats other cells. (A) Didinium is
a carnivorous protist, belonging to the
group of ciliates. (A protist is defined as a
free-living, single-cell, mobile eukaryote.)
Didinium has a globular body, about
150 μm in diameter, encircled by
two fringes of cilia—sinuous, whiplike
appendages that beat continually; its
front end is flattened except for a single
protrusion, rather like a snout. (B) A
Didinium engulfing its prey. It normally
swims around in the water at high speed
by means of the synchronous beating of
its cilia. When it encounters a suitable prey,
usually another type of protist, it releases
numerous small paralyzing darts from its
snout region. Then, it attaches to and
devours its prey (artificially colored yellow)
by phagocytosis, inverting like a hollow ball
to engulf its victim, which can be almost as
large as itself. (Courtesy of D. Barlow.)32
Chapter 1: Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life
red algae
Archaeplastida
Haptophytes
Chlamydomonas
mosses
Alveolates
flowering
plants
(including
ciliates)
Excavates
(including Euglena,
Giardia, and Trichomonas)
Stramenopiles
(including
diatoms and
oomycetes)
Fungi
Opisthokonts
Rhizaria
Animals
(including hydra
and humans)
(including foraminifera)
Amoebozoa
(including amoeba and
slime molds)
Figure 1–35 A eukaryotic tree of life based on genome comparisons. The lengths of the lines are proportional to the
extents of genome diversity, with broken lines indicating uncertain relationships. Note that animals and plants are separated
by many single-cell species (including the Excavates), suggesting that multicellularity arose independently several times during
eukaryotic evolution. (Adapted from F. Burki, Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 6:a016147, 2014.)
MBoC7 n1.700/1.35
are easily manipulated using powerful genetic techniques. Others are transpar-
ent and readily develop in the laboratory from a fertilized egg to a multicellular
organism, so that one can readily trace how their cells behave to produce internal
tissues and organs.
Over time, different groups of biologists have focused on studying a few cho-
sen species, which allows their knowledge and research tools to be pooled to gain
a deeper understanding than could be achieved if their efforts were spread over
many different organisms. Although the list of these representative, model organ-
isms is continually expanding, a few stand out in terms of the breadth and depth
of information that has been accumulated about them over the years—knowledge
that has been essential for our understanding of how all cells work. In this section,
we examine some of these organisms and review the benefits that each offers to
the study of cell biology and, in many cases, to the promotion of human health.
We begin with a discussion of some especially powerful strategies that scientists
have developed to understand the cell, and we shall see how these approaches
dictated the choice of model organisms.
Mutations Reveal the Functions of Genes
Without additional information, no amount of gazing at genome sequences will
reveal the functions of genes. We may recognize that gene B is like gene A, but
how do we discover the function of gene A in the first place? And even if we know33
MODEL ORGANISMS
the function of gene A, how do we test whether the function of gene B is truly
the same as the sequence similarity suggests? How do we connect the world of
abstract genetic information that was introduced in the previous sections with the
world of living cells and organisms?
The analysis of gene functions depends on two highly complementary
approaches: biochemistry and genetics. Biochemistry directly examines the
functions of purified molecules, such as the protein and RNA produced from a
specific gene: first we obtain that molecule from an organism and then study its
chemical activities in detail. In contrast, genetics starts with the study of mutants:
we either find or make an organism in which the specific gene is altered, and we
then examine the effects on the mutant organism’s structure and performance
(Figure 1–36). When combined with biochemistry, careful studies of an organ-
ism (and its isolated cells) mutated for a particular protein or RNA molecule can
reveal the biological role of that molecule.
Biochemistry and genetics, used in combination with cell biology, provide
a powerful way to connect genes and molecules directly to cell and organism
structure and function. In recent years, DNA sequence information and the
powerful tools of molecular biology have greatly accelerated progress in this
endeavor. From sequence comparisons, we can often identify particular subre-
gions within a gene that have been conserved nearly unchanged over the course
of evolution. These subregions are often the most important parts of the gene
in terms of function. We can test their individual contributions to the gene’s
function by creating in the laboratory mutations of specific sites within the sub-
region or by constructing artificial hybrid genes that combine part of one gene
with parts of another. Organisms can be engineered to make either the RNA or
protein specified by the gene in large quantities to facilitate biochemical anal-
ysis. Specialists in molecular structure can determine the three-dimensional
conformation of the gene product, revealing the exact position of every atom in
it. Biochemists can determine how each of the parts of the genetically specified
molecule contributes to its chemical behavior and function in a test tube. Cell
biologists determine the many other molecules that interact with the molecule
of interest and where all these molecules are located within a cell. And they also
analyze the behavior of cells that are engineered to express a mutant version of
the gene.
There is, however, no one simple universal recipe for discovering a gene’s
function. We may discover, for example, that the product of a given gene is an
enzyme that catalyzes a certain chemical reaction, and yet have no idea how or
why that reaction is important to the organism. The functional characterization of
each new gene product or family of gene products, unlike the description of the
gene sequences, presents a fresh challenge to the biologist’s ingenuity. Moreover,
we will never fully understand the function of a gene until we learn its role in
the life of the organism, which means studying whole organisms, not just isolated
molecules or cells.
Molecular Biology Began with a Spotlight on One Bacterium
and Its Viruses
Because living organisms are so complex, the more we learn about any particular
species, the more attractive it becomes as an object for further study. Each discov-
ery in such a chosen organism raises new questions and provides new tools with
which to tackle general biological questions. For this reason, large communities
of biologists have become dedicated to studying different aspects of the same
model organism.
In the early days of molecular biology, the chosen model was the bacterium
Escherichia coli (E. coli—see Figure 1–11B). This small, rod-shaped cell normally
lives in the gut of humans and other vertebrates, but it can be grown easily in
a simple nutrient broth in a culture bottle or dish, where under favorable con-
ditions, it can reproduce every 20 minutes or so. It adapts to variable chemical
conditions and can evolve by mutation and selection at a remarkable speed.
5 µm
Figure 1-36 An alteration in organism
shape resulting from a gene mutation.
Scanning electron micrographs (discussed
in Chapter 9) of a normal yeast (of the
species Schizosaccharomyces pombe)
compared with a mutant yeast, where a
change in MBoC7
a single genem1.23/1.36
has converted the
cell from a cigar shape (left) to a T shape
(right). The mutant gene therefore has a
function controlling cell shape. But how, in
molecular terms, does the gene product
perform that function? That is a harder
question, and it needs biochemical analysis
to answer it. (Courtesy of Kenneth Sawin
and Paul Nurse.)Chapter 1: Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life
34
Also of special early interest were a few of the viruses that infect this bacterium—
inasmuch as their much smaller genomes made them even easier to analyze
in detail.
Viruses are small packets of genetic material that have evolved as parasites
that depend on the reproductive and biosynthetic machinery of the host cells
they infect. Viruses are not strictly alive, because they depend on the machinery
of their host cells for their reproduction. Although we now know that viruses are
the most abundant—in terms of sheer numbers—of all the biological entities on
this planet, they are too small to be seen in the light microscope. For this rea-
son, they were completely missed until the end of the nineteenth century, when a
few viruses were identified as infectious agents that pass through filters that trap
bacteria, but are retained by the even-finer filters that allow large molecules to
pass. Only with the invention of the electron microscope could viruses finally
be visualized as tiny particles with defined shapes and sizes. We now know that
viruses consist of many families, with different families having distinct structures
and modes of replication (discussed in Chapters 6 and 23).
Those viruses that infect bacteria are called bacteriophages, and two that infect
E. coli have played critical roles as model organisms that advanced our under-
standing of molecular cell biology. Detailed genetic analyses of these two viruses,
bacteriophage lambda and bacteriophage T4, came first, followed by biochem-
istry that used the analysis of mutant genes to identify and characterize specific
proteins of interest. Geneticists, for example, generated and then characterized
more than a hundred different mutant genes in bacteriophage T4, a large virus
with a double-strand DNA genome (Figure 1–37). Sets of T4 genes that encode
components of the head and the tail of the bacteriophage were identified, allow-
ing biochemical studies to reveal important principles of biological assembly
processes. Similarly, a set of T4 genes that geneticists showed were essential for T4
(A)
(C)
100 nm
(D)
(B)
100 nm
(E)
100 nm
Figure 1–37 The T4 bacteriophage.
(A) An electron micrograph of particles of
the T4 bacteriophage, a virus that infects
E. coli bacteria. The hexagonal head of
the virus contains the viral DNA; the tail
contains the apparatus for injecting the
DNA into a host bacterium. (B) A cross
section of an E. coli bacterium with a T4
bacteriophage attached to its surface. The
large dark objects inside the bacterium
are the assembling heads of new T4
particles. When the particles are mature,
the bacterium will burst open and release
them. (C–E) The process of DNA injection
into the bacterium, as visualized in
unstained, frozen samples by cryo-electron
microscopy (discussed in Chapter 9).
(C) Attachment begins. (D) Attached state
during DNA injection. (E) Virus head has
emptied its entire DNA into the bacterium.
(A, courtesy of James Paulson; B, courtesy
of Jonathan King and Erika Hartwig from
G. Karp, Cell and Molecular Biology,
2nd ed. New York: John Wiley & Sons,
1999. With permission from John Wiley
& Sons; C–E, courtesy of Ian Molineux,
University of Texas at Austin, and Jun Liu.)MODEL ORGANISMS
DNA replication allowed those proteins to be purified, so that biochemists could
decipher the central mechanisms of DNA replication in a test tube. In the same
way, it was extensive studies of bacteriophage lambda that led to our early under-
standing of transcription regulators and gene regulatory networks (see Panel 7–1
on pp. 404–405 and Figure 7–43).
We now know that these two bacteriophages have many close relatives dis-
tributed throughout the biosphere. Relatives of bacteriophage T4, for example,
are abundant in the ocean, where they infect the ubiquitous marine cyanobac-
teria. As a whole, ocean viruses are present in enormous numbers, estimated
at 1030. If lined up end to end, they would extend beyond our nearest galaxies;
they kill approximately 20% of the total ocean microbial biomass per day. Because
these viruses have such a huge role in nutrient recycling, they profoundly affect
Earth’s ecology.
Although not themselves living cells, viruses often serve as vectors for gene
transfer between cells. A virus will replicate in one cell, emerge from it with a
protective wrapping, and then enter and infect another cell, which may be of the
same or different species. Often, the infected host cell is killed by the massive
proliferation of virus particles inside it, but sometimes the viral DNA, instead of
directly generating new virus particles, may persist in its host for many cell gen-
erations as a relatively innocuous passenger—either as a separate intracellular
fragment of DNA, known as a plasmid, or as a DNA sequence inserted into the
cell’s own genome. In their travels, viruses can accidentally pick up fragments of
DNA from the genome of one host cell and ferry them into another cell. Such
transfers of genetic material are very common in prokaryotes.
Many bacterial and archaeal species have a remarkable capacity to take up
even nonviral DNA molecules from their surroundings and thereby capture the
genetic information these molecules carry. By this route or by virus-mediated
gene transfer, bacteria and archaea in the wild can acquire genes from neigh-
boring cells relatively easily. Genes that confer resistance to an antibiotic or an
ability to produce a toxin, for example, can be transferred from species to spe-
cies and provide the recipient bacterium with a selective advantage, greatly
enhancing its rate of spread. In this way, new and sometimes dangerous strains
of antibiotic-resistant bacteria have been observed to evolve in the bacterial
ecosystems that inhabit hospitals or various niches in the human body. On
a longer time scale, the results can be even more profound; it has been esti-
mated that at least 18% of all the genes in the present-day genome of E. coli
have been acquired by horizontal transfer from another species within the past
100 million years.
The Focus on E. coli as a Model Organism Has Accelerated
Many Subsequent Discoveries
The standard laboratory strain E. coli K-12 has a genome of approximately 4.6 mil-
lion nucleotide pairs contained in a single circular molecule of DNA that codes
for about 4300 different kinds of proteins (Figure 1–38). In molecular terms, we
probably have a more complete understanding of E. coli than of any other living
organism. Most of our understanding of the fundamental mechanisms of life—
for example, how cells replicate their DNA or how they decode the instructions
represented in the DNA to direct the synthesis of specific RNAs and proteins—
initially came from studies of E. coli and its viruses. This is because the basic
genetic mechanisms have turned out to be highly conserved throughout evolu-
tion and are essentially the same in our own cells as in E. coli.
It should be noted that, as with other bacteria, different strains of E. coli,
though classified as members of a single species, differ genetically to a much
greater degree than do different varieties of an organism such as a plant or ani-
mal. One E. coli strain may possess many hundreds of genes that are absent from
another, and the two strains could have as little as 50% of their genes in common.
These differences are largely the result of rampant horizontal gene transfer, char-
acteristic of this and many other bacterial and archaeal species.
3536
Chapter 1: Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life
origin of
replication
(A)
Escherichia coli K-12
4,639,221 nucleotide pairs
1 μm
terminus of
replication
(B)
Figure 1–38 The genome of E. coli. (A) A cluster of E. coli cells viewed in a scanning electron
microscope. (B) A diagram of the genome of E. coli strain K-12. The diagram is circular because
the DNA of E. coli, like that of most other bacteria, forms a single, closed loop. Protein-coding
genes are shown as yellow or orange bars, depending on the DNA strand from which they are
transcribed; RNA molecules produced from nonprotein-coding genes are indicated by green
arrows, with the arrowheads indicating their direction of transcription. Some genes are transcribed
from one strand of the DNA double helix (in a clockwise direction in this diagram), others from the
other strand (counterclockwise). The origin and terminus of DNA replication are marked with red
arrowheads. (A, Dr. Tony Brain & David Parker/Science Source; B, adapted from F.R. Blattner et al.,
Science 277:1453–1462, 1997.)
A Yeast Serves as a Minimal Model Eukaryote
MBoC7 m1.24/1.38
The molecular and genetic complexity of eukaryotes is daunting, and biologists
need to concentrate their limited resources on a small number of selected model
organisms to unravel this complexity.
To analyze the internal workings of the eukaryotic cell without the additional
problems of multicellular development, it makes sense to use a single-cell species
that is as simple as possible. The popular choice for this role of minimal model
eukaryote has been the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Figure 1–39)—the same
species that is used by brewers of beer and bakers of bread.
S. cerevisiae is a small, single-cell member of the kingdom of fungi and, in terms
of its genome sequence, much more closely related to animals than to plants (see
Figure 1–35). It is robust and easy to grow in a simple nutrient medium. Like other
fungi, it has a tough cell wall, is relatively immobile, and possesses mitochon-
dria but not chloroplasts. When nutrients are plentiful, it grows and divides about
every hundred minutes. It can reproduce either vegetatively (that is, by ordinary
cell division, or mitosis), or sexually: two yeast cells that are haploid (possessing
a single copy of each chromosome, n = 1) can fuse to create a cell that is dip-
loid (containing two copies of each chromosome, n = 2), and the diploid cell
can undergo meiosis (a reduction division) to produce cells that are once again37
MODEL ORGANISMS
cell wall
Golgi stack
nucleus
mitochondrion
ribosomes
(A)
10 µ m
(B)
plasma membrane
1 µm
Figure 1–39 The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. (A) A scanning electron micrograph of a
cluster of yeast cells. This species is also known as budding yeast, because it proliferates by
forming a protrusion, or bud, that enlarges and then separates from the mother cell. Many cells with
buds are visible in this micrograph. (B) An electron micrograph of a cross section of a yeast cell,
showing its plasma membrane and thick cell wall, as well as some of its intracellular organelles.
(A, courtesy of Ira Herskowitz and Eric Schabtach; B, courtesy of Andrew Staehelin.)
haploid (Figure 1–40). In contrast to most animals, this yeast can therefore prolif-
erate either sexually or asexually, a choice
an experimenter can make simply
MBoC7 that
m1.36,9.34/1.39
by changing the growth conditions.
In addition to these features, the yeast has a further property that makes it a
convenient organism for genetic studies: its genome, by eukaryotic standards, is
exceptionally small (see Table 1–2), yet it suffices for all the basic tasks that every
eukaryotic cell must perform. Mutants are available for every gene, and thus the
consequence of missing each gene—one by one—can be observed under any
environmental condition using the high-throughput procedures described in
Chapter 8. Over the past 50 years, extensive studies of yeast cells carried out by
many laboratories have provided keys to crucial “eukaryotic-only” processes.
These include the cell-division cycle (the critical chain of events by which the
nucleus and all the other components of a cell are duplicated and parceled out
to create two daughter cells from one) and meiosis (the process through which
an organism’s reproductive cells are formed). In addition, important insights into
eukaryotic chromosome structure, the organization of the nucleus, the mecha-
nisms of gene expression, the formation of organelles, and the ways that proteins
are secreted from cells have come out of the work on yeasts. Many of these fun-
damental processes are so similar between yeasts and humans that a human
homolog of a yeast protein will often faithfully carry out its functions when artifi-
cially expressed in yeast cells.
The Expression Levels of All the Genes of an Organism
Can Be Determined
The complete genome sequence of S. cerevisiae consists of approximately
12,500,000 nucleotide pairs, including the small contribution (about 78,500 nucle-
otide pairs) of the mitochondrial DNA. This total is only about 2.7 times as much
DNA as there is in E. coli, and it codes for only about 1.5 times as many distinct pro-
teins (see Table 1–2). The way of life of S. cerevisiae is similar in many ways to that
of a bacterium, and it seems that this yeast has likewise been subject to selection
pressures (for rapid proliferation, for example) that have kept its genome compact.
Knowledge of the complete genome sequence of any organism—be it a yeast
or a human—opens up new perspectives on the workings of the cell: many things
that once seemed impossibly complex now seem to be within our grasp. Using
techniques described in Chapter 8, it is possible, for example, to monitor simul-
taneously, the amount of mRNA produced from every gene in the yeast genome
under any environmental condition. It is also possible to determine in real time
2n
2n
proliferation
of diploid cells
2n
meiosis and sporulation
(triggered by starvation)
2n
n
n
mating (usually
immediately after
spores hatch)
n
n
spores hatch
n
n
n
proliferation
of haploid
cells
n
BUDDING YEAST LIFE CYCLE
Figure 1–40 The reproductive cycles of
the yeast S. cerevisiae. Depending on
environmental conditions and on details of
the genotype, cells of this species can exist
in either a diploid (2n) state, with a double
chromosome set, or a haploid (n) state,
with a single chromosome set. The diploid
form can either proliferate by ordinary cell-
division cycles (mitosis) or undergo meiosis
to produce haploid cells. The haploid
MBoC7
m1.37/1.40
form can
either proliferate
by ordinary
cell-division cycles or undergo sexual
fusion with another haploid cell to become
diploid. Meiosis is triggered by starvation,
and it gives rise to spores—haploid cells
in a dormant state, resistant to harsh
environmental conditions.38
Chapter 1: Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life
how the pattern of gene activity changes when conditions change. This type of
analysis can be repeated with mRNA prepared from mutant cells lacking any gene
we care to test, and, in this way, the influence of that gene on the expression of
all other genes can be observed. Although pioneered in yeast, this approach now
provides a way to reveal the entire system of controls that govern gene expression
in any organism, as long as its genome sequence is known and it can be manipu-
lated genetically.
Arabidopsis Has Been Chosen as a Model Plant
The large multicellular organisms that we see around us—the plants and
animals—seem fantastically varied, but, as we have seen, they are much closer
to one another in their evolutionary origins, and more similar in their basic cell
biology, than the great host of microscopic single-celled organisms we have been
discussing. Thus, while bacteria and archaea are separated by perhaps 3.5 billion
years of evolution, vertebrates and insects are separated by about 700 million
years, fish and mammals by about 450 million years, and the different species of
flowering plants by only about 150 million years (see Figure 1–35).
Because of the close evolutionary relationship between all flowering plants (see
Figure 1–35), we can, once again, gain insight into the cell and molecular biology of
this whole class of organisms by focusing on just one or a few species for detailed
analysis. Out of the nearly 400,000 known species of flowering plants, molecular
biologists have chosen to concentrate their efforts on a small weed in the cabbage
family, the common wall cress Arabidopsis thaliana (Figure 1–41), which can be
grown indoors in large numbers and produces thousands of offspring per plant
after 8–10 weeks. Arabidopsis has a total genome size of approximately 135 million
nucleotide pairs, about 10 times the size of the yeast genome (see Table 1–2).
Work on Arabidopsis has provided a deep understanding of numerous key
features of plants, including the mechanisms that cause flower development and
its coordination with the seasons, the ability to grow toward sunlight, cell-to-cell
signaling by hormones, and the special type of innate immune system that plants
use to ward off pathogens. Comparison of the developmental programs between
plants and animals has also highlighted some common principles, thereby allow-
ing a glimpse into the basic logic through which large, highly differentiated,
multicellular organisms evolved from single-cell ancestors.
The World of Animal Cells Is Mainly Represented by a Worm, a Fly,
a Fish, a Mouse, and a Human
Although plants make up 80% of the biomass on Earth and animals make up less
than 0.4% (see Figure 1–14), animals account for the majority of all named species
of living organisms, and they are by far the most intensely studied. Five species have
emerged as the foremost model organisms for molecular, cell, and developmental
biological studies. In order of increasing body size, they are the nematode worm
Caenorhabditis elegans, the fly Drosophila melanogaster, the zebrafish Danio rerio,
the mouse Mus musculus, and the human, Homo sapiens. Genome sequences
from many different individuals within each species have been determined.
Caenorhabditis elegans (Figure 1–42) is a small, harmless relative of the
eelworm that attacks crops. With a life cycle of only a few days, an ability to sur-
vive in a freezer indefinitely in a state of suspended animation, a simple body
0.2 mm
1 cm
Figure 1–41 Arabidopsis thaliana, the
plant chosen as the primary model
for studying plant molecular genetics.
(Courtesy of Toni Hayden, FLS; and the
John Innes Foundation.)
MBoC7 m1.38/1.41
Figure 1–42 Caenorhabditis elegans,
the first multicellular organism to
have its complete genome sequence
determined. This nematode is only
about 1 mm long and normally lives in the
soil. Most individuals are hermaphrodites,
producing both eggs and sperm.
(Courtesy of Maria Gallegos, University
of Wisconsin, Madison.)39
MODEL ORGANISMS
antennae
(A)
misplaced legs
1 mm
(B)
Figure 1–43 Drosophila melanogaster.
(A) A normal adult Drosophila fruit fly.
Molecular genetic studies of this fly have
provided the main key to understanding
how all animals develop from a fertilized
egg into an adult. (B) A mutant adult fly,
in which a mutation in a regulatory DNA
sequence has caused genes for leg
formation to be abnormally activated in
positions normally reserved for antennae;
as a result, legs have developed where
antennae should be. (A, Edward B. Lewis,
Courtesy of the Archives, California
Institute of Technology; B, courtesy of
Matthew Scott.)
plan, and an unusual life cycle that is well suited for genetic studies, it is an attrac-
tive model animal. C. elegans develops with clockwork precision from a fertilized
egg cell into an adult worm with exactly 959 body cells (plus a variable number of
egg and sperm cells)—an unusual degree of regularity for animal development.
We now have a minutely detailed description of the sequence of events by which
this development occurs, as the cells divide, move, and change their character
according to strict and predictable rules (see Figure 21–42). The genome of about
100 million nucleotide pairs codes for about 20,000 proteins, and many mutants
and other tools are available for testing gene functions. Although the worm has a
body plan very different from our own, the conservation of biological mechanisms
has been sufficient for the worm to be a model for many of the developmental and
cell-biological processes that occur in the human body. Thus, for example, studies
of the worm have been critical for understanding the molecular mechanisms that
mediate and regulate the many cell deaths that help control animal-cell num-
MBoC7
e9.13/1.43
bers, both in normal development
and
during human cancer growth. This crucial
process, called programmed cell death or apoptosis, is the subject of Chapter 18.
In addition, studies in C. elegans first revealed many fascinating features of RNA
interference (discussed in Chapters 7 and 8). They have also provided key insights
into the ways neurons make their proper connections (discussed in Chapter 21)
and informed many additional areas of cell biology.
Studies in the Fruit Fly Drosophila Provide a Key
to Vertebrate Development
The fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster (Figure 1–43) has been used as a model for
animal genetic studies for longer than any other organism; in fact, the foundations
of classical genetics were built to a large extent on studies of this insect. Nearly
100 years ago, for example, the fly provided definitive proof that genes—the abstract
units of hereditary information at the time—are carried on chromosomes, whose
behavior had been closely followed with the light microscope during eukaryotic
cell division but whose function was at first unknown. The proof depended on
one of the many features that make Drosophila especially convenient for molecu­
lar genetic studies—the giant chromosomes, which have a characteristic banded
appearance that is visible in some of its cells (Figure 1–44). Specific changes in the
hereditary information, manifest in families of mutant flies, were found to correlate
exactly with the loss or alteration of specific bands in the giant chromosomes.
In more recent times, Drosophila, more than any other organism, has shown us
how to trace the chain of cause and effect from the genetic instructions encoded in
the chromosomal DNA to the structure of the adult multicellular body. Drosoph-
ila mutants with body parts strangely misplaced (Figure 1–43) or mispatterned
provided the key to the identification and characterization of the genes required
to make a properly structured body, with gut, limbs, eyes, and all the other parts
in their correct places. Once these Drosophila genes were identified, scientists
could identify homologous genes in vertebrates, and then test their functions
20 µ m
Figure 1–44 Giant chromosomes from
salivary gland cells of Drosophila.
Because many rounds of DNA replication
have occurred without an intervening cell
division, each of the chromosomes in
these unusual cells contains more
than 1000 identical double-strand
MBoC7
m1.41/1.44
DNA molecules,
all aligned
in register.
This makes them easy to see in the
light microscope, where they display a
characteristic and reproducible pattern of
bands. Specific bands can be identified as
the locations of specific genes: a mutant
fly with a region of the banding pattern
missing or altered shows a phenotype
reflecting loss of the genes in that region
(not shown). Genes that are being
transcribed at a high rate correspond to
bands with a “puffed” appearance (black
arrow). The bands stained dark brown in
the micrograph are sites where a particular
regulatory protein is bound to the DNA;
the regulatory protein is identified by the
binding of a specific antibody. (From R.
Paro, Trends Genet. 6:416–421, 1990.
With permission from Elsevier.)Chapter 1: Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life
40
hours
0
61634
16 cellsblastulagastrula
67
96
284
1 mm
fertilized egg
neurula
Figure 1–45 The early stages of normal frog development. These drawings show the
development of a Rana pipiens tadpole from a fertilized egg. The entire process takes place
outside the mother, making the mechanisms involved readily accessible for experimental studies.
(From W. Shumway, Anat. Rec. 78:139–147, 1940. With permission from John Wiley & Sons.)
tail bud
there by analyzing mice in which the genes had been mutated. The results have
revealed an astonishing degree of similarity in the molecular mechanisms that
govern insect and vertebrate development (discussed in Chapter 21).
The majority of all named species of living organisms are insects. Even if
Drosophila had nothing in common with vertebrates, but only with insects, it
would still be an important model organism. But, if understanding the molecular
genetics of vertebrates is the goal, why not simply tackle the problem head-on in
vertebrates, instead of sidling up to it obliquely through studies in Drosophila?
There are many reasons. Drosophila requires only 9 days to progress from a
fertilized egg to an adult; it is vastly easier and cheaper to breed than any ver-
tebrate, and its genome is much smaller—about 180 million nucleotide pairs,
compared with about 3.1 billion for a human (see Table 1–2). Its genome codes
for about 14,000 proteins, and mutants are now available for essentially any gene.
In addition to its foundational contributions to animal development, research on
Drosophila continues to uncover many other insights into biology, ranging from
deeply conserved mechanisms that neutralize pathogens to ways that external
stimuli from the environment are processed in the brain.
tadpole
The Frog and the Zebrafish Provide Highly Accessible
Vertebrate Models
MBoC7 m1.43/1.45
Frogs have long been used to study the early steps of embryonic development
in vertebrates. Because their eggs are big, easy to manipulate, and fertilized out-
side of the animal, the subsequent development of the early embryo can be easily
followed (Figure 1–45). Xenopus laevis, the African clawed frog, continues to
be an important model organism (Movie 1.6 and see Movie 21.1). Although the
species is poorly suited for genetic analysis, cytoplasm isolated from unfertilized
Xenopus eggs has the remarkable ability to recapitulate the formation of cellular
structures and organelles in a test tube. These egg extracts allow powerful bio-
chemical approaches to study such fundamental processes as the cell division
cycle, described in Chapter 17.
The zebrafish Danio rerio, in contrast, is well suited for genetic analysis.
Its genome is compact—only half as big as that of a mouse or a human (see
Table 1–2)—and it has a generation time of only about 3 months, which is much
Figure 1–46 Zebrafish as a model for studies of vertebrate development. (A) These small,
hardy tropical fish are found in many home aquaria and are convenient for laboratory genetic
studies. They are ideal for developmental studies as their embryos develop outside of the
mother and are transparent, so one can observe cells and internal structures in the living
organism throughout its development from an egg to an adult. (B) In this fluorescence image of
a 2-day-old embryo, a red fluorescent protein marks the developing blood vessels, and a green
fluorescent protein marks the developing lymphatic vessels; regions where the two markers
coincide appear yellow. (A, courtesy of Steve Baskauf; B, from H.M. Jung et al., Development
144:2070–2081, 2017. With permission from The Company of Biologists.)
(A)
(B)
1 cm
1 mm41
MODEL ORGANISMS
shorter than that of Xenopus laevis. Many mutants are available, and genetic
manipulation is relatively simple. The zebrafish has the added virtue that it is trans-
parent for the first 2 weeks of its life, so behavior of specific tissues and individual
cells can easily be followed in the living organism as it develops (Figure 1–46; see
Movie 21.2). All this has made it an increasingly important model vertebrate, one
that has been especially crucial for understanding the development of the heart
and the circulatory system, as discussed in Chapter 22.
The Mouse Is the Predominant Mammalian Model Organism
human/chimp100
Tertiaryhuman/orangutan
mouse/rat
cat/dog98
84
86
Cretaceouspig/whale
pig/sheep
human/rabbit
human/elephant
human/mouse
human/sloth77
87
82
83
89
81
Jurassichuman/kangaroo81
Triassicbird/crocodile76
human/lizard57
human/chicken70
human/frog56
human/tuna fish55
human/shark51
human/lamprey35
0
50
100
time in millions of years
150
200
250
Permian
300
Carboniferous
350
Devonian
400
Silurian
450
Ordovician
500
Cambrian
550
Proterozoic
percent amino acids identical in hemoglobin α chain
In terms of genome size and function, cell biology, and molecular mechanisms,
mammals are a highly uniform group of organisms. Even anatomically, the dif-
ferences among mammals are chiefly a matter of size and proportions; it is hard
to think of a human body part that does not have a counterpart in elephants and
mice, and vice versa. Evolution plays freely with quantitative features, but it does
not readily change the logic of the basic structure.
Mammals have typically about 1.5 times as many protein-coding genes as
Drosophila, a genome that is about 16 times larger, and an adult body made
up of millions or billions of times as many cells. For an exact measure of how
closely mammalian species resemble one another genetically, we can compare
the nucleotide sequences of corresponding (orthologous) genes or the amino
acid sequences of the proteins that these genes encode. The results for individ-
ual genes and proteins vary widely. But typically, if we line up the amino acid
sequence of a human protein with that of the orthologous protein from, say, an
elephant, more than 80% of the amino acids are identical. A similar comparison
between human and bird shows an amino acid identity of about 70%—because
the bird and mammalian lineages have had longer to diverge than those of the
elephant and the human, they have accumulated more differences (Figure 1–47).
Figure 1–47 Times of divergence of
different vertebrates. The scale on the left
shows the estimated date and geological
era of the last common ancestor of each
specified pair of animals. Each time
estimate is based on comparisons of the
amino acid sequences of orthologous
proteins; the longer the animals of a pair
have had to evolve independently, the
smaller the percentage of amino acids that
remain identical. The time scale has been
calibrated to match the fossil evidence
showing that the last common ancestor of
mammals and birds lived about 320 million
years ago.
The figures on the right show the amino
acid sequence divergence for one particular
protein—the α chain of hemoglobin. Note
that although there is a clear general trend
of increasing divergence with increasing
time for this protein, there are irregularities
that are thought to reflect the action
of natural selection causing especially
rapid changes in hemoglobin sequence
when the organisms experienced special
physiological demands. Some proteins that
are subject to stricter functional constraints
evolve much more slowly than hemoglobin,
whereas others evolve as much as five
times faster. (Adapted from S. Kumar
and S.B. Hedges, Nature 392:917–920,
1998.)42
Chapter 1: Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life
Figure 1–48 Similar mutations produce
the same effect in human and mouse.
The human baby and the mouse shown
here have remarkably similar abnormal
white patches on their foreheads as a
result of a mutation in the same gene
(called Kit), which is required for the normal
development, migration, and survival of
some skin pigment cells. (Courtesy of R.A.
Fleischman, from R.A. Fleischman et al.,
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 88:10885–
10889, 1991.)
The mouse, being small, hardy, and a rapid breeder, has become the foremost
model organism for experimental studies of mammalian molecular cell biology.
Many naturally occurring mutations are known, often mimicking the effects of
corresponding mutations in humans to a remarkable extent (Figure 1–48). More-
over, methods have beenMBoC7
developed
to test the function of any chosen mouse
m1.46/1.48
gene or of any noncoding portion of the mouse genome by artificially creating
mutations in the relevant part of the gene or genome, as we explain in Chapter 8.
Just one made-to-order mutant mouse can provide a wealth of information for
the cell biologist. It reveals the effects of the chosen mutation in various contexts,
simultaneously testing the action of the gene in the many different types of cells
in the body that could in principle be affected. Studies of the mouse are so fun-
damental to understanding mammalian biology that we will encounter them in
nearly every chapter of this book.
The COVID-19 Pandemic Has Focused Scientists
on the SARS-CoV-2 Coronavirus
Having discussed several of the most prominent and well-studied model organ-
isms—which are based on the cell as their fundamental unit—we now turn to an
intensively studied virus. Viruses, which in essence feed on cells, are prevalent
in all three domains of life: bacteria, archaea, and eukaryotes. We introduced
them earlier in this chapter when we discussed several E. coli viruses that served
as critical experimental systems for the initial development of molecular biology.
Here, we focus on one prominent virus, SARS-CoV-2, that infects our own cells
and has, due to the widespread attention it has received from scientists, become
a model system for understanding eukaryotic viruses. But before discussing
this virus in detail, we consider how viruses—genomes packaged in protective
shells—first came to be, and how they have evolved over time.
As described in Chapter 6, cells are believed to have first evolved in an “RNA
world,” before there were proteins or DNA molecules. Scientists suspect that even
at that time, parasitic genetic elements were present, in the form of small RNA
molecules that took advantage of more advanced replicating entities to prolif-
erate. These are believed to have been the ancestors of today’s smallest viruses,
which contain single-strand RNA genomes composed of as few as 3000 nucleo-
tides. Thus, virus-like entities have probably been a ubiquitous feature of life on
Earth for more than 3 billion years.
At a minimum, a virus requires a genome that encodes two core functions: first,
a nucleic acid replication process that produces multiple copies of its genome
once inside its host cell, and second, a genome-packaging process that surrounds
these new genomes with a protective protein coat, while allowing the viruses to
exit the host cell and subsequently enter others. But the viruses present today
have evolved through billions of infectious cycles, during which there has been
a constant war between host organisms and the viruses—with host cells evolving43
MODEL ORGANISMS
spike protein (S)
E protein
NONSTRUCTURAL
PROTEINS
Nsp1
Nsp2
S
E
Nsp3
RNA
N protein
viral membrane
M protein
(A)
100 nm
(B)
50 nm
Nsp4
Nsp5
Nsp6
Nsp7
Nsp8
Nsp9
Nsp10
Nsp11
Nsp12
Nsp13
Nsp14
Nsp15
Nsp16
(C)
Figure 1–49 The coronavirus. (A) Electron micrograph of SARS-CoV-2 virus particles attached to the surface of a cultured
monkey cell. (B) A cut-away drawing of the virus that highlights its protruding spike protein molecules plus a few other major
proteins. The spike protein is the major target for vaccines that are designed to block infections, because it attaches the virus
to the outside of host cells and then catalyzes transfer of the viral genome into the cell interior. As indicated, the RNA genome
is packaged unevenly inside the enveloped virus particle. (C) The 29 proteins produced by SARS-CoV-2, grouped into three
different categories. The locations of the structural proteins
S, M,n1.200/1.49
E, and N in the virus are indicated in panel B. Each of the
MBoC7
proteins listed in the “accessory” category has a role in protecting the virus from host antiviral responses. The functions of
the nonstructural proteins include binding to ribosomes to block host protein synthesis (Nsp1), forming a double-membrane
“replication organelle” from host-cell membranes (Nsp 3, 4, and 6), and forming the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase
(Nsp 7, 8, and 12). The way in which the virus reproduces itself, once inside a host cell, is shown in Figure 5–62. (A, from
M. Laue et al. Sci. Rep. 11:3515, 2021. With permission from Cold Spring Harbor Press.)
multiple antivirus defenses and viruses evolving various ways to overcome these
defenses. As a result, through cycles of random mutation followed by natural
selection over long evolutionary times, most virus genomes have grown much
larger than needed for their two core functions, with many of the additional genes
encoding proteins that help the viruses to circumvent their host-cells’ defenses.
Coronavirus genomes are large, single-strand RNA molecules, about 30,000
nucleotides long. This RNA is packaged in a protein coat that is covered with
a lipid bilayer envelope, from which protein spikes protrude (Figure 1–49A
and B). Many coronavirus strains circulate in animal species, including pigs, birds,
and bats. Some strains also circulate among humans; these so-called “endemic”
strains cause only mild symptoms and are responsible for about one in four com-
mon colds. But on rare occasions, a bat coronavirus mutates in a way that allows it
to infect humans, where it can cause very severe, even fatal, disease. It is thought
that the COVID-19 pandemic of 2020 originated in this way.
The virus that causes COVID-19, SARS-CoV-2, produces 29 proteins
(Figure 1–49C). Some are structural proteins that package the virus’s RNA genome
into the virus particle. The nonstructural proteins are critical for replicating the
viral genome inside of the host cell, as well as for ensuring that the viral genes are
appropriately translated into proteins, including the viral RNA polymerase com-
plex. And, as one would expect, other proteins help the virus to avoid the host’s
immune defenses, which are described in Chapter 24.
The SARS-CoV-2 virus is closely related to the coronaviruses that cause
colds, as well as to the SARS-CoV virus that emerged from bats in 2002 and killed
nearly 1 in 10 of the humans it infected. We still do not understand what makes
SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 infections so much more dangerous to humans than
the infections caused by their close relatives that cause only a mild cold. But,
given the thousands of research laboratories currently focused on understanding
the cell biology of SARS-CoV-2 with the aim of ameliorating the COVID-19 pan-
demic, we should know the answers to these questions in the near future. These
studies are certain to make us much better prepared to deal with the next virus
that emerges to threaten us.
STRUCTURAL
PROTEINS
M
N
ACCESSORY
PROTEINS
Orf3a
Orf3b
Orf6
Orf7a
Orf7b
Orf8
Orf9b
Orf9c
Orf1044
Chapter 1: Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life
Humans Are Unique in Reporting on Their Own Peculiarities
As humans, we have a special interest in the human genome. We want to know
how our genes and their products work. But, even if you were a mouse, pre-
occupied with how mouse genes and their products work, humans would be
attractive as model genetic organisms because of one special property: through
medical examinations and self-reporting, we catalog our own genetic (and other)
disorders. The human population is enormous, consisting today of some
8 billion individuals, and this self-documenting property means that a huge
database exists of human mutations and their effects. And the human genome
sequence of more than 3 billion nucleotide pairs has been determined for hun-
dreds of thousands of people, making it easier than ever before to identify at a
molecular level the precise genetic change responsible for any given human
mutant phenotype.
But what precisely do we mean when we speak of the human genome?
Whose genome? On average, any two people taken at random will differ at roughly
4 million different sites in their DNA sequence (see Table 4–3, p. 247). Thus, the
human genome is very complex, embracing the entire pool of variant genes found
in the human population. As described in Chapter 4, knowledge of this variation
is helping us to understand human biology; for example, why some people are
prone to one disease, others to another, and why some respond well to a drug,
but others badly. It is also providing clues to our history, including population
movements, interbreeding among our ancestors, the infections they suffered, and
the diets they ate. All these things have left traces in the variant forms of genes
that survive today in the human communities that populate our planet, and
by exploiting this fact, scientists have been discovering fascinating aspects of
our past.
By drawing together the insights from humans, mice, fish, flies, worms, yeasts,
plants, and bacteria—using DNA sequence similarities to map out the correspon-
dences between one model organism and another—we are greatly enriching our
understanding of them all.
To Understand Cells and Organisms Will Require Mathematics,
Computers, and Quantitative Information
Empowered by knowledge of complete genome sequences, we can list the genes,
proteins, and RNA molecules in a cell, and we have powerful methods to analyze
the complex web of interactions between them. But how are we to use all this
information to understand how cells work? Even for a single cell type belonging to
a single species of organism, the current deluge of data seems overwhelming. The
informal reasoning that biologists usually rely on seems increasingly inadequate
in the face of such complexity.
The difficulty is more than just a matter of information overload. Biological
systems are, for example, full of feedback loops, and the behavior of even the
simplest of systems with feedback is remarkably difficult to predict by intuition
alone (Figure 1–50); small changes in parameters can cause radical changes in
outcome. To go from a circuit diagram to a prediction of the behavior of the
Figure 1–50 A very simple gene regulatory circuit. A single gene regulates its own expression
because its protein product is a transcription regulator that binds to the regulatory DNA of its own
gene. Simple schematic diagrams such as this are found throughout this book. They are often
used to summarize what we know, but they leave many questions unanswered. When the protein
binds, does it inhibit or stimulate transcription from the gene? How steeply does the transcription
rate depend on the protein concentration? How long, on average, does a molecule of the protein
remain bound to the DNA? How long does it take to make each molecule of mRNA or protein, and
how quickly does each type of molecule get degraded? As explained in Chapter 8, mathematical
modeling shows that we need quantitative answers to all these and other questions—obtained
by direct observations and experiments—before we can predict the behavior of even this simple
circuit. For different parameter values, the system may settle to a unique steady state; or it may
behave as a switch, capable of existing in one or another of a set of alternative states; or it may
oscillate; or it may even show large random fluctuations.
regulatory
DNA
protein-
coding
region
mRNA
synthesis of
transcription
regulator
protein
MBoC7 m1.47/1.50MODEL ORGANISMS
system, we need detailed quantitative information, and to draw deductions from
that information we need mathematics and computers.
Such tools for quantitative reasoning are essential, but they are not all-
powerful. You might think that, knowing how each protein in a cell influences
each other protein, and how the expression of each gene is regulated by the prod-
ucts of other genes, we should soon be able to calculate how the cell as a whole will
behave, just as an astronomer can calculate the orbits of the planets or a chemical
engineer can calculate the flows through a chemical plant. But any attempt to
perform this feat for anything close to an entire living cell rapidly reveals the limits
of our present knowledge. The information we have, plentiful as it is, is full of gaps
and uncertainties, and it is largely qualitative rather than quantitative. Most often,
cell biologists studying a cell’s control systems sum up their knowledge in simple
schematic diagrams—this book is full of them—rather than in numbers, graphs,
and differential equations.
To progress from qualitative descriptions and intuitive reasoning to quantita-
tive descriptions and mathematical deduction is one of the biggest challenges for
contemporary cell biology. So far, the challenge has been met for only a few very
simple fragments of the machinery of living cells—subsystems involving a hand-
ful of different proteins, or two or three genes that regulate one another, where
theory and experiment go closely hand in hand. We discuss some of these exam-
ples later in the book and devote much of Chapter 8 to some new approaches
designed to answer the increasingly complex questions that arise in biology.
Knowledge and understanding bring the power to intervene—with humans,
to prevent and treat disease; with plants, to create better crops; with bacteria,
archaea, and fungi, to control them for our own benefit. All these biological
enterprises are linked, because the genetic information of all living organisms is
written in the same language. The recent ability of molecular biologists to read
and decipher this language has already begun to transform our relationship to the
living world. The account of cell biology in the subsequent chapters will, we hope,
equip the reader to understand, and possibly to contribute to, the great biosci-
ences adventure that we can anticipate through the rest of this century.
Summary
Powerful new technologies, including rapid and cheap genome sequencing, are
enabling rapid advances in our knowledge of human biology, with implications
for understanding and treating human disease. But living systems are incredibly
complex, and simpler model organisms have played a critical part in revealing uni-
versal genetic and molecular cell biological mechanisms. Thus, for example, early
research on the bacterium E. coli and its viruses provided the foundations needed
to decipher the fundamental genetic mechanisms in all cells. And research on the
unicellular yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which continues to serve as a simple
model organism for eukaryotic cell biology, has revealed the molecular basis for
many critical processes that have been strikingly conserved during more than a bil-
lion years of eukaryotic evolution. Biologists have also chosen a small number of
multicellular organisms for intensive study: a worm, a fly, a fish, the mouse, and
humans serve as model organisms for animals, and a small member of the cabbage
family serves as a model for plant biology. Even today, research that focuses on
these and other model organisms remains crucial for understanding ourselves, as
well as for driving scientific and medical advances.
4546
Chapter 1: Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life
PROBLEMS
Which statements are true? Explain why or why not.
1–1
DNA and RNA use the same four-letter alphabet.
1–2
Each member of the human hemoglobin gene
family, which consists of seven genes arranged in two clus-
ters on different chromosomes, is an ortholog to all of the
other members.
1–3
Most of the DNA sequences in a bacterial genome
code for proteins, whereas most of the DNA sequences in
the human genome do not.
1–4
Without additional information, no amount of gaz-
ing at genome sequences will reveal the functions of genes.
Discuss the following problems.
1–5
“Life” is easy to recognize but difficult to define.
Dictionaries commonly define life as “The state or quality
that distinguishes living beings or organisms from dead
ones and from inorganic matter, characterized chiefly by
metabolism, growth, the ability to reproduce, and the abil-
ity to respond to stimuli.” Score a car, a cactus, and yourself
with respect to these characteristics.
number of codes (thousands)
1–6
Since it was deciphered more than five decades
ago, some have claimed that the genetic code must be a
frozen accident, while others have argued that it was
shaped by natural selection. A striking feature of the
genetic code is its inherent resistance to the effects of
mutation. For example, a change in the third position of
a codon often specifies the same amino acid or one with
similar chemical properties. The natural code resists muta-
tion more effectively (is less susceptible to error) than most
other possible versions, as illustrated in Figure Q1–1. Only
one in a million computer-generated “random” codes is
more error-resistant than the natural genetic code. Does
the extraordinary mutation resistance of the genetic code
argue in favor of its origin as a frozen accident or as a result
of natural selection? Explain your reasoning.
20
15
10
natural
code
5
0
0
5
10
15
susceptibility to mutation
20
Figure Q1–1 Susceptibility to mutation of the natural code shown
relative to that of millions of computer-generated alternative genetic
codes (Problem 1–6). Susceptibility measures the average change in
amino acid properties caused by random mutations in a genetic code.
A small value indicates that mutations tend to cause minor changes.
(Data courtesy of Steve Freeland.)
MBoC7 Q1.1
You have begun to characterize a sample obtained
1–7
from the depths of the oceans on Europa, one of Jupiter’s
moons. Much to your surprise, the sample contains a life-
form that grows well in a rich broth. Your preliminary
analysis shows that it is cellular and contains DNA, RNA,
and protein. When you show your results to a colleague,
she suggests that your sample was contaminated with an
organism from Earth. What approaches might you try to
distinguish between contamination and a novel cellular
life-form that is based on DNA, RNA, and protein?
1–8
It is not so difficult to imagine what it means to
feed on the organic molecules that living things produce.
That is, after all, what we do. But what does it mean to
“feed” on sunlight, as phototrophs do? Or, even stranger, to
“feed” on rocks, as lithotrophs do? Where is the “food,” for
example, in the mixture of chemicals (H2S, H2, CO, Mn+,
Fe2+, Ni2+, CH4, and NH4+) that spews from a hydrother-
mal vent?
1–9
How many possible different trees (branching
patterns) can be drawn to display the evolution of bacteria,
archaea, and eukaryotes, assuming that they all arose from
a common ancestor?
1–10 The genes for ribosomal RNA are highly con-
served (relatively few sequence changes) in all organisms
on Earth; thus, they have evolved very slowly over time.
Were ribosomal RNA genes “born” perfect?
1–11 Rates of evolution appear to vary in different
lineages. For example, the rate of evolution in the rat lin-
eage is significantly higher than in the human lineage.
These rate differences are apparent whether one looks at
changes in nucleotide sequences that encode proteins and
are subject to selective pressure or at changes in noncod-
ing nucleotide sequences, which are not under obvious
selection pressure. Can you offer one or more possible
explanations for the slower rate of evolutionary change in
the human lineage versus the rat lineage?
1–12 Genes participating in informational processes
such as replication, transcription, and translation undergo
horizontal gene transfer between species much less often
than do genes involved in metabolism. The basis for this
inequality is unclear at present, but one suggestion is that
it relates to the underlying complexity of the two types of
processes. Informational processes tend to involve large
aggregates of different gene products, whereas metabolic
reactions are usually catalyzed by enzymes composed of a
single protein. Why would the complexity of the underly-
ing process—informational or metabolic—have any effect
on the rate of horizontal gene transfer?
1–13 Animal cells have neither cell walls nor chlo-
roplasts, whereas plant cells have both. Fungal cells are
somewhere in between; they have cell walls but lack chlo-
roplasts. Are fungal cells more likely to be animal cells that47
REFERENCES
gained the ability to make cell walls or to be plant cells
that lost their chloroplasts? This question represented a
difficult issue for early investigators who sought to assign
evolutionary relationships solely on the basis of cell char-
acteristics and morphology. How do you suppose that this
question was eventually decided?
1–14 Giardia lamblia is a fascinating eukaryotic par-
asite; it contains a nucleus but no mitochondria and no
discernible endoplasmic reticulum or Golgi apparatus—
one of the very rare examples of such a cellular organization
among eukaryotes. This cell organization might have
arisen because Giardia is an ancient lineage that sepa-
rated from the rest of the eukaryotes before mitochondria
were acquired and internal membranes were developed.
Or it might be a stripped-down version of a more standard
eukaryote that has lost these structures because they are
not necessary for its parasitic lifestyle. How might you use
nucleotide sequence comparisons to distinguish between
these alternatives?
1–15 When plant hemoglobin genes were first discov-
ered in legumes, it was so surprising to find a gene typical
of animal blood that it was hypothesized that the plant
gene arose by horizontal transfer from an animal. Many
more hemoglobin genes have now been sequenced, and
a phylogenetic tree based on some of these sequences is
shown in Figure Q1–2.
A.
Does this tree support or refute the hypothe-
sis that the plant hemoglobins arose by horizontal gene
transfer?
Supposing that the plant hemoglobin genes were
B.
originally derived from a parasitic nematode, for example,
what would you expect the phylogenetic tree to look like?
VERTEBRATES
Salamander
Cobra
Rabbit
Chicken
Whale
Cat
Human
Cow
Frog
Goldfish
PLANTS
Barley
Lotus
Earthworm
Alfalfa
Insect
Bean
Clam
INVERTEBRATES
Chlamydomonas
Nematode
PROTOZOA
Paramecium
Figure Q1–2 Phylogenetic tree for hemoglobin genes from a variety
of species (Problem 1–15). The legumes are highlighted in green. The
lengths of lines that connect the present-day species represent the
evolutionary distances that separate them.
MBoC7 Q1.2
REFERENCES
General
Alberts B, Hopkin K, Johnson A, et al. (2019) Essential Cell Biology,
5th ed. New York: Norton.
Barton NH, Briggs DEG, Eisen JA, et al. (2007) Evolution. Cold Spring
Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.
Darwin C (1859) On the Origin of Species. London: Murray.
Hall BK & Hallgrímsson B (2014) Strickberger’s Evolution, 5th ed.
Burlington, MA: Jones & Bartlett.
Lynch M (2007) The Origins of Genome Architecture. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Madigan MT, Bender KS, Buckley DH et al. (2018) Brock Biology of
Microorganisms, 15th ed. London: Pearson.
Margulis L & Chapman MJ (2009) Kingdoms and Domains: An
Illustrated Guide to the Phyla of Life on Earth. San Diego:
Academic Press.
Moore JA (1993) Science as a Way of Knowing. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
The Universal Features of Life on Earth
Blain JC & Szostak JW (2014) Progress toward synthetic cells. Annu.
Rev. Biochem. 83, 615–640.
Brenner S, Jacob F & Meselson M (1961) An unstable intermediate
carrying information from genes to ribosomes for protein synthesis.
Nature 190, 576–581.
Gibson DG, Benders GA, Andrews-Pfannkoch C . . . Smith HO
(2008) Complete chemical synthesis, assembly, and cloning
of a Mycoplasma genitalium genome. Science 319,
1215–1220.
Koonin EV (2005) Orthologs, paralogs, and evolutionary genomics.
Annu. Rev. Genet. 39, 309–338.
Noller H (2005) RNA structure: reading the ribosome. Science 309,
1508–1514.
Watson JD & Crick FHC (1953) Molecular structure of nucleic
acids: a structure for deoxyribose nucleic acid. Nature 171,
737–738.
Genome Diversification and the Tree of Life
Baker BJ, De Anda V, Seitz KW . . . Lloyd KG (2020) Diversity,
ecology and evolution of Archaea. Nat. Microbiol. 5,
887–900.
Doolittle WF & Brunet TDP (2016) What is the tree of life. PLoS Genet.
12(4), e1005912.
Eme L, Spang A, Lombard J . . . Thijs JG (2017) Archaea and the
origin of eukaryotes. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 15(12), 711–723.
Hug LA, Baker BJ, Anantharaman K . . . Banfield JF (2016) A new
view of the tree of life. Nat. Microbiol. 1, 16048.
Kerr RA (1997) Life goes to extremes in the deep earth—and
elsewhere? Science 276, 703–704.48
Chapter 1: Cells, Genomes, and the Diversity of Life
Woese C (1998) The universal ancestor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
95, 6854–6859.
Eukaryotes and the Origin of the Eukaryotic Cell
Andersson SG, Zomorodipour A, Andersson JO . . . Kurland CG (1998)
The genome sequence of Rickettsia prowazekii and the origin of
mitochondria. Nature 396, 133–140.
Burki F, Roger AJ, Brown MW & Simpson AGB (2020) The new tree of
eukaryotes. Trends Ecol. Evol. 35(1), 43–55.
Carroll SB, Grenier JK & Weatherbee SD (2005) From DNA to Diversity:
Molecular Genetics and the Evolution of Animal Design, 2nd ed.
Maldon, MA: Blackwell Science.
Imachi H, Nobu MK, Nakahara N . . . Takai K (2020) Isolation of an
archaeon at the prokaryote–eukaryote interface. Nature 577,
519–525.
Spang A, Caceres EF & Ettema TJG (2017) Genomic exploration of
the diversity, ecology, and evolution of the archaeal domain of life.
Science 357(6351), eaaf3883.
Model Organisms
Adams MD, Celniker SE, Holt RA . . . Venter JC (2000) The
genome sequence of Drosophila melanogaster. Science 287,
2185–2195.
Blattner FR, Plunkett G, Bloch CA . . . Shao Y (1997) The complete
genome sequence of Escherichia coli K-12. Science 277,
1453–1474.
Goffeau A, Barrell BG, Bussey H . . . Oliver SG (1996) Life with 6000
genes. Science 274, 546–567.
International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium (2001) Initial
sequencing and analysis of the human genome. Nature 409,
860–921.
Krupovic M, Dolja VV & Koonin EV (2019) Origin of viruses: primordial
replicators recruiting capsids from hosts. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 17(7),
449–458.
Lander ES (2011) Initial impact of the sequencing of the human
genome. Nature 470, 187–197.
Lynch M & Conery JS (2000) The evolutionary fate and consequences
of duplicate genes. Science 290, 1151–1155.
Masters PS (2006) The molecular biology of coronaviruses. Adv. Virus
Res. 66, 193–292.
Prangishvili D, Bamford DH, Forterre P, . . . Krupovic M (2017) The
enigmatic archaeal virosphere. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 15(12),
724–739.
Reed FA & Tishkoff SA (2006) African human diversity, origins and
migrations. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 16, 597–605.
The Arabidopsis Initiative (2000) Analysis of the genome sequence of
the flowering plant Arabidopsis thaliana. Nature 408, 796–815.
The C. elegans Sequencing Consortium (1998) Genome sequence
of the nematode C. elegans: a platform for investigating biology.
Science 282, 2012–2018.
Tinsley RC & Kobel HR (eds.) (1996) The Biology of Xenopus. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Weiss SR (2020) Forty years with coronaviruses. J. Exp. Med. 217(5),
e20200537.49
CHAPTER
2
Cell Chemistry and
Bioenergetics
It is at first sight difficult to accept the idea that living creatures are merely
chemical systems. Their incredible diversity of form, their seemingly purposeful
behavior, and their ability to grow and reproduce all seem to set them apart from
the world of solids, liquids, and gases that chemistry normally describes. Indeed,
until the late nineteenth century, animals were generally believed to contain a
Vital Force—an “animus”—that was responsible for their distinctive properties.
We now know that there is nothing in living organisms that disobeys chem-
ical or physical laws. However, the chemistry of life is indeed special. First, life
depends on chemical reactions that take place in aqueous solution, and it is based
overwhelmingly on carbon compounds, the study of which is known as organic
chemistry. Second, although cells contain a variety of small carbon-containing
molecules, most of the carbon atoms present are incorporated into enormous poly-
meric molecules—chains of chemical subunits linked end-to-end. It is the unique
properties of these macromolecules that enable cells and organisms to grow and
reproduce—and to do all the other things that are characteristic of life. Third, and
most important, cell chemistry is enormously complex: even the simplest cell is
vastly more complicated in its chemistry than any other chemical system known.
In fact, we now recognize that the many interlinked networks of chemical reactions
in cells can give rise to so-called emergent properties, which will require the devel-
opment of new experimental and computational methods to understand.
Much of the information in this chapter is summarized—and in some cases
further elaborated—in the nine two-page Panels with which the chapter ends
(Panels 2–1 to 2–9). Although the Panels will be cited at appropriate places in the
text, they should also be useful for refreshing background knowledge when read-
ing later chapters.
THE CHEMICAL COMPONENTS OF A CELL
Living organisms are made of only a small selection of the 92 naturally occurring
elements, four of which—carbon (C), hydrogen (H), nitrogen (N), and oxygen (O)—
make up 96.5% of an organism’s weight (Figure 2–1). The atoms of these
atomic number
1
H
1
He
atomic weight
5
Li Be
11
19
K
39
Ca Sc
40
Rb Sr
Y
Ti
23
V
51
N
14
15
8
O
16
16
9
F
19
17
Ne
Ar
Cr Mn Fe Co Ni Cu Zn Ga Ge As Se BrKr
24
20
C
12
14
7
Cl
Al
Na Mg
23
B
11
12
6
24
52
42
25
55
26
56
27
59
28
59
29
64
Si
28
30
65
P
31
S
32
34
79
Zr Nb Mo Tc Ru Rh Pd Ag Cd In Sn Sb Te
96
Cs Ba LaHf Ta W Re Os
Fr Ra AcRf Db
Ir
Pt Au Hg Tl Pb
35
53
I
127
Xe
Bi Po At Rn
IN THIS CHAPTER
The Chemical Components of
a Cell
Catalysis and the Use of Energy
by Cells
How Cells Obtain Energy
from Food
Figure 2–1 The main elements in cells,
highlighted in the periodic table. When
ordered by their atomic number and
arranged in this manner, elements fall
into vertical columns that show similar
properties.
The four elements highlighted in red
constitute 99% of the total number of
atoms present in the human body (and
96.5% of its weight). An additional seven
elements, highlighted in blue, together
represent about 0.9% of the total atoms in
our bodies. The elements shown in green
are required in trace amounts by humans.
It remains unclear whether those elements
shown in yellow are essential in humans.
The chemistry of life is therefore
predominantly the chemistry of lighter
elements. The atomic weights shown here
are those of the most common isotope of
each element. The vertical red line marks a
break in the periodic table where a group of
large atoms with similar chemical properties
is omitted.50
Chapter 2: Cell Chemistry and Bioenergetics
ATP
hydrolysis
in cell
average
thermal motions
ENERGY
CONTENT
(kJ/mole)
1
10
noncovalent bond
breakage in water
C–C bond
breakage
100
1000
10,000 kJ
green
complete
light glucose oxidation
Figure 2–2 Some energies important for cells. A crucial property of any bond—covalent or
noncovalent—is its strength. Bond strength is measured by the amount of energy that must be
supplied to break it, expressed in units of either kilojoules per mole (kJ/mole) or kilocalories per
mole (kcal/mole). Thus if 100 kJ of energy must be supplied to break 6 × 1023 bonds of a specific
type (that is, 1 mole of these bonds), then the strength of that bond is 100 kJ/mole. Note that, in
this diagram, energies are compared on a logarithmic scale. (Typical strengths and lengths of the
main classes of chemical bonds are given in Table 2–1, later in text.)
One joule (J) is the amount of energy required to move an object a distance of 1 meter (m)
MBoC7
m2.02/2.02
against a force of 1 newton (N). This
measure
of energy is derived from the SI units (Système
International d’Unités) universally employed by physical scientists. A second unit of energy, often
used by cell biologists, is the kilocalorie (kcal):1 calorie (cal) is the amount of energy needed to raise
the temperature of 1 gram (g) of water by 1°C. One kilojoule (kJ) is equal to 0.239 kcal.
elements are linked together by covalent bonds to form molecules (see Panel 2–1,
pp. 94–95). Because covalent bonds are typically 100 times stronger than the
thermal energies within a cell, they resist being pulled apart by thermal motions,
and they are normally broken only during biologically catalyzed chemical
reactions that are of use to the cell. Noncovalent bonds are much weaker
(Figure 2–2), but sets of them allow molecules to recognize each other and
reversibly associate, which is critical for the vast majority of biological functions.
(A)
H
δ+
H
δ
δ+
δ
_
O
δ+
_
O
H
Water Is Held Together by Hydrogen Bonds
Because 70% of the weight of a cell is water, the reactions that make life pos-
sible occur in an aqueous environment. Life on Earth is thought to have begun
in shallow bodies of water that had concentrated essential molecules, and
the conditions in that primeval environment have left a permanent stamp on
the chemistry of all living things.
The chemical properties of water are reviewed in Panel 2–2 (pp. 96–97). In
a water molecule (H2O), the two H atoms are linked to the O atom by covalent
bonds that are highly polar, inasmuch as the O atom attracts electrons more
strongly than does the H atom. Consequently, there is a preponderance of pos-
itive charge on the two H atoms and of negative charge on the O atom. When
a positively charged region of one water molecule (that is, one of its H atoms)
approaches a negatively charged region (that is, the O atom) of a second water
molecule, the electrical attraction between them can result in a hydrogen bond
(Figure 2–3A). These bonds are much weaker than covalent bonds and are easily
broken by the random thermal motions that reflect the heat energy of the mol-
ecules. Thus, each bond lasts only a very short time. But the combined effect
of many weak bonds can be profound. For example, each water molecule can
form hydrogen bonds through its two H atoms to two other water molecules,
producing a network in which hydrogen bonds are being continually broken and
formed. It is only because of these hydrogen bonds that link water molecules
together that water is a liquid at room temperature—with a high boiling point
and high surface tension—rather than a gas.
Hydrogen bonds are not limited to water, and they are central to much of
biology. This bond represents a special form of polar interaction in which an elec-
tropositive hydrogen atom is shared by two electronegative atoms. The hydrogen
in this bond can be viewed as a proton that has partially dissociated from a donor
atom, allowing it to be shared by a second, acceptor atom. Unlike a typical electro-
static interaction, this bond is highly directional—being strongest when a straight
line can be drawn between all three of the involved atoms (Figure 2–3B).
polar
covalent
bond
(B)
hydrogen
bond
OHO
OHN
NHO
NH
donor
atom
H
δ+
N
acceptor
atom
Figure 2–3 The noncovalent hydrogen
bond. (A) A hydrogen bond forms between
two water molecules. The slight positive
charge associated with the hydrogen atom
is electrically attracted to the slight negative
charge of the oxygen atom. This causes
water to exist as a large hydrogen-bonded
MBoC7
e2.14/2.03
network (see
Panel
2–2, pp. 96–97).
(B) In cells, hydrogen bonds commonly
form between molecules that contain an
oxygen or nitrogen. The atom bearing
the hydrogen is considered the H-bond
donor, and the atom that interacts with
the hydrogen is the H-bond acceptor. This
type of dipole–dipole interaction is of critical
importance in biology. For this reason,
and because it is highly directional, the
hydrogen bond receives special attention
among the set of noncovalent attractions
that we discuss next.51
THE CHEMICAL COMPONENTS OF A CELL
Molecules, such as alcohols, that contain polar bonds and that can form
hydrogen bonds with water dissolve readily in water. Molecules carrying charges
(ions) likewise interact favorably with water. Such molecules are termed hydro-
philic, meaning that they are water-loving. Many of the molecules in the aqueous
environment of a cell necessarily fall into this category, including sugars, DNA,
RNA, and most proteins. Hydrophobic (water-fearing) molecules, by contrast,
are uncharged and form few or no hydrogen bonds, and so do not dissolve in
water. Hydrocarbons are an important example. In these molecules, all of the H
atoms are covalently linked to C atoms by a largely nonpolar bond; thus, they
cannot form effective hydrogen bonds to other molecules (see Panel 2–1, pp. 94–95).
This makes the hydrocarbon as a whole hydrophobic—a property that is exploited
in cells, whose membranes are constructed from molecules that have long
hydrocarbon tails, as we shall see in Chapter 10.
Four Types of Noncovalent Attractions Help Bring Molecules
Together in Cells
Much of biology depends on the specific binding between different molecules
caused by three types of noncovalent bonds—hydrogen bonds, electrostatic
attractions (ionic bonds), and van der Waals attractions—combined with a
fourth factor that can push molecules together: the hydrophobic force.
Electrostatic attractions are strongest when the atoms involved are fully
charged, or ionized. But a weaker electrostatic attraction occurs between mole­
cules that contain polar covalent bonds. Like hydrogen bonds, electrostatic
attractions are extremely important in biology. For example, any large mole-
cule with many polar groups will have a pattern of partial positive and negative
charges on its surface. When such a molecule encounters a second molecule with
a complementary set of charges, the two will be drawn to each other by electro-
static attraction.
In addition to hydrogen bonds and electrostatic attractions, a third type of
noncovalent bond, called a van der Waals attraction, comes into play when any
two atoms approach each other closely. These weak, nonspecific interactions
are due to fluctuations in the distribution of electrons in every atom, which can
generate a transient attraction when the atoms are in very close proximity. These
attractions occur in all types of molecules, even those that are nonpolar.
The relative lengths and strengths of these three types of noncovalent bonds
are compared to the length and strength of covalent bonds in Table 2–1, both in
the presence and in the absence of water. Note that, because water forms com-
peting interactions with the involved molecules, the strength of both electrostatic
attractions and hydrogen bonds is greatly weakened inside of the cell.
The fourth effect that often brings molecules together in water is not, strictly
speaking, a bond at all. However, a very important hydrophobic force is caused
by a pushing of nonpolar surfaces out of the hydrogen-bonded water network,
where they would otherwise physically interfere with the highly favorable
TABLE 2–1 Covalent and Noncovalent Chemical Bonds
Strength (kJ/mole**)
Bond typeLength (nm)In vacuumIn water
Covalent0.10377 (90)377 (90)
Ionic*0.25335 (80)12.6 (3)
Hydrogen0.1716.7 (4)4.2 (1)
van der Waals
attraction (per atom)0.350.4 (0.1)0.4 (0.1)
Noncovalent
*An ionic bond is an electrostatic attraction between two fully charged atoms.
**Values in parentheses are kcal/mole. 1 kJ = 0.239 kcal and 1 kcal = 4.18 kJ.52
Chapter 2: Cell Chemistry and Bioenergetics
interactions between water molecules. Bringing any two nonpolar surfaces
together reduces their contact with water, and in this sense, the force is nonspe-
cific. Nevertheless, we shall see in Chapter 3 that hydrophobic forces are central to
the proper folding of protein molecules.
The properties of the four types of noncovalent attractions are presented in
Panel 2–3 (pp. 98–99). Although each individual noncovalent attraction would
be much too weak to be effective in the face of thermal motions, the energies
of these noncovalent attractions can sum to create a strong force between
two separate molecules. Thus, it is an entire set of noncovalent attractions that
enables the complementary surfaces of two macromolecules to hold the two
macromolecules together (Figure 2–4).
Some Polar Molecules Form Acids and Bases in Water
One of the simplest kinds of chemical reaction, and one that has a considerable
signifi­cance for cells, takes place when a molecule containing a highly polar cova-
lent bond between a hydrogen and another atom dissolves in water. The hydrogen
atom in such a molecule has given up its electron almost entirely to the compan-
ion atom, and so exists as an almost naked positively charged hydrogen nucleus;
in other words, a proton (H1). When this polar molecule becomes surrounded
by water molecules, the proton will be attracted to the partial negative charge
on the O atom of an adjacent water molecule. The proton can easily dissociate
from its original partner and associate instead with the oxygen atom of the water
molecule, generating a hydronium ion (H3O1) (Figure 2–5A). The reverse reac-
tion also takes place very readily, so in an aqueous solution protons are constantly
flitting to and fro between one molecule and another.
Substances that release protons when they dissolve in water, thus forming
H3O+, are termed acids. The higher the concentration of H3O+, the more acidic
the solution. H3O+ is present even in pure water, at a concentration of 10–7 M,
as a result of the movement of protons from one water molecule to another
(Figure 2–5B). By convention, the H3O+ concentration is usually referred to as
the H+ concentration, even though most protons in an aqueous solution are
present as H3O+. As explained in Panel 2–2, to avoid the use of unwieldy num-
bers the concentration of H3O+ is expressed using a logarithmic scale called the
pH scale. Pure water has a pH of 7.0 and is said to be neutral; that is, neither acidic
(pH < 7) nor basic (pH > 7).
Acids are characterized as being strong or weak, depending on how readily
they give up their protons to water. Strong acids, such as hydrochloric acid (HCl),
easily lose their protons. Acetic acid, on the other hand, is a weak acid because
it holds on to its proton more tightly when dissolved in water. Many of the
acids important in the cell—such as molecules containing a carboxyl (COOH)
group—are weak acids.
Because the proton of a hydronium ion can be passed readily to many types of
molecules in cells, altering their character, the concentration of H3O+ inside a cell
(the acidity) must be closely regulated. Acids—especially weak acids—will give
O
CH3
+ O
C
O
δ–
O
H
H
δ+
acetic acid
CH3
water
acetate
ion
H
(B)
O
HH O
H
H2OH2O
proton moves
from one
molecule to
the other
+
O
(A)
H
H
C
H
O H
H +
H3O
+
hydronium
ion
+
Figure 2-4 Schematic indicating
how two macromolecules with
complementary surfaces can bind tightly
to one another through noncovalent
interactions. Noncovalent chemical bonds
have less than 1/20 the strength of a
covalent bond. They are able to produce
tight binding only when many of them
are formed simultaneously. Although only
electrostatic attractions are illustrated here,
in reality all four noncovalent forces often
MBoC7
m2.03/2.04
contribute
to holding
two macromolecules
together (Movie 2.1).
H
O
+
H
hydronium
ion
O
H
–
OH
hydroxyl
ion
Figure 2–5 How protons readily move
in aqueous solutions. (A) The reaction
that takes place when a molecule of acetic
acid dissolves in water. At pH 7, nearly all
of the acetic acid is present as acetate ion.
(B) Water molecules continually exchange
protons with each other to form hydronium
and hydroxyl ions. These ions in turn
rapidly recombine to form water molecules.THE CHEMICAL COMPONENTS OF A CELL
up their protons more readily if the concentration of H3O+ in solution is low and
will tend to receive them back if the concentration in solution is high.
The opposite of an acid is a base. Any molecule capable of accepting a pro-
ton from a water molecule is called a base. Sodium hydroxide (NaOH) is basic
(the term alkaline is also used) because it dissociates readily in aqueous solu-
tion to form Na+ ions and OH– ions. Because of this property, NaOH is called
a strong base. More important in living cells, however, are the weak bases—
those that have a weak tendency to reversibly accept a proton from water.
Many biologically important molecules contain an amino (NH2) group. This
group is a weak base that can generate OH– by taking a proton from water:
–NH2 + H2O → –NH3+ + OH– (see Panel 2–2, pp. 96–97).
Because an OH– ion combines with an H3O+ ion to form two water molecules,
any increase in the OH– concentration forces a decrease in the concentration
of H3O+, and vice versa. Thus the product of the two values, [OH–] × [H3O+],
is always 10–14 (moles/liter)2. A pure solution of water contains an equal con-
centration (10–7 M) of both ions, rendering it neutral. The interior of a cell is also
kept close to neutrality by the presence of buffers: weak acids and bases that
can release or take up protons near pH 7, keeping the environment of the cell
relatively constant under a variety of conditions.
A Cell Is Formed from Carbon Compounds
Having briefly reviewed the ways that atoms combine into molecules and how
these molecules behave in an aqueous environment, we now examine the
main classes of small molecules found in cells. We shall see that a few catego-
ries of molecules, formed from a handful of different elements, give rise to all the
extraordinary richness of form and behavior shown by living things.
If we disregard water and inorganic ions such as potassium, nearly all the mole-
cules in a cell are based on carbon. Carbon is outstanding among all the elements in
its ability to form large molecules; silicon is a poor second. Because carbon is small
and has four electrons and four vacancies in its outermost shell, a carbon atom
can form four covalent bonds with other atoms. Most important, one carbon atom
can join to other carbon atoms through highly stable covalent C–C bonds to form
chains and rings and hence generate large and complex molecules with no obvious
upper limit to their size. The carbon compounds made by cells are called organic
molecules. In contrast, all other molecules, including water, are said to be inorganic.
Certain combinations of atoms, such as the methyl (–CH3), hydroxyl (–OH),
carboxyl (–COOH), carbonyl (–C�O), phosphate (–PO32–), sulfhydryl (–SH), and
amino (–NH2) groups, occur repeatedly in the molecules made by cells. Each such
chemical group has distinct chemical and physical properties that influence the
behavior of the molecule in which the group occurs. The most common chemical
groups and some of their properties are summarized in Panel 2–1 (pp. 94–95).
Cells Contain Four Major Families of Small Organic Molecules
The small organic molecules of the cell are carbon-based compounds that have
masses in the range of 100–1000 daltons and contain up to 30 or so carbon atoms.
They are usually found free in solution and have many different fates. Some are
used as monomer subunits to construct the giant polymeric macromolecules that
make up most of the mass of the cell—proteins, nucleic acids, and large poly-
saccharides. Others act as energy sources and are broken down and transformed
into other small molecules in a maze of intracellular metabolic pathways. Many
small molecules have more than one role in the cell; for example, acting both as
a potential subunit for a macromolecule and as an energy source. Small organic
molecules account for only about one-tenth of the total mass of organic matter
in a cell, but they are very diverse. Nearly 4000 different kinds of small organic
molecules have been detected in the well-studied bacterium, Escherichia coli.
All organic molecules are synthesized from and are broken down into the
same set of simple compounds. As a consequence, the compounds in a cell are
53Chapter 2: Cell Chemistry and Bioenergetics
54
CH2OH
H
C
HO
C
HO
OHH
CC
H
OH
H
+
H3N
C
C
H
small organic building blocks
of the celllarger organic molecules
of the cell
SUGARSPOLYSACCHARIDES, GLYCOGEN,
AND STARCH (IN PLANTS)
COO
CH3
OH
A SUGAR
AN AMINO ACID
H H H H H H H H H H H H H H
H C C C C C C C C C C C C C C
H H H H H H H H H H H H H H
A FATTY ACID
NH2
N
FATTY ACIDSFATS AND MEMBRANE LIPIDS
AMINO ACIDSPROTEINS
NUCLEOTIDESNUCLEIC ACIDS
O
C
_
O
Figure 2–6 The four main families of small organic molecules in
cells. These small molecules form the monomeric building blocks, or
subunits, for most of the macromolecules and other assemblies of the
cell. Some, such as the sugars and the fatty acids, are also energy
sources. Their structures are outlined here and shown in more detail
in the Panels at the end of this chapter and in Chapter 3.
N
O
–O
P
O
CH2
O–
N
O
OH
N
OH
A NUCLEOTIDE
chemically related and most can be classified into a few distinct families. Broadly
speaking, cells contain four major families of small organic molecules: the sugars,
the fatty acids, the nucleotides, and the amino acids (Figure 2–6). Although many
compounds present in cells do not fit into these categories, these four families
of small organic molecules, together with the macromolecules made by linking
them into long chains, account for a large fraction of the cell mass.
Amino acids and the proteins that they form will be the subject of Chapter 3.
A summary of the structures and properties of theMBoC7
remaining
three families—
e2.17/2.06
sugars, fatty acids, and nucleotides—is presented in Panels 2–4, 2–5, and 2–6,
respectively (see pp. 100–105).
The Chemistry of Cells Is Dominated by Macromolecules with
Remarkable Properties
By weight, macromolecules are the most abundant carbon-containing mole­
cules in a living cell (Figure 2–7). They are the principal components from which
a cell is constructed, and they also determine the most distinctive properties of
living organisms. The macromolecules in cells are polymers that are constructed
bacterial
cell
30%
chemicals
CELL
VOLUME OF
2 × 10–12 cm3
inorganic ions (1%)
small molecules (3%)
phospholipid (2%)
DNA (1%)
RNA (6%)
MACROMOLECULES
70%
H 2O
protein (15%)
polysaccharide (2%)
Figure 2–7 The distribution of molecules
in cells. The approximate composition of
a bacterial cell is shown by weight. The
composition of an animal cell is similar,
even though its volume is roughly 1000
times greater. Note that macromolecules
dominate. The major inorganic ions include
Na+, K+, Mg2+, Ca2+, and Cl–.55
THE CHEMICAL COMPONENTS OF A CELL
by covalently linking small organic molecules (called monomers) into long chains
(Figure 2–8). They have remarkable properties that could not have been predicted
from their simple constituents.
Proteins are abundant and spectacularly versatile, performing thousands
of distinct functions in cells. Many proteins serve as enzymes, the catalysts that
facilitate the many covalent bond-making and bond-breaking reactions that the
cell needs. Enzymes catalyze all of the reactions in which cells extract energy
from food molecules, for example. Other proteins are used to build structural
components, such as tubulin, a protein that self-assembles to make the cell’s
long microtubules, or histones, proteins that compact the DNA in chromo-
somes. Many proteins serve as signaling devices, producing networks that control
cell functions. Yet other proteins act as molecular motors to produce force and
movement, as for myosin in muscle. We shall describe the remarkable chemistry
that underlies these diverse roles throughout this book.
Although the chemical reactions that add subunits to each polymer are
different in detail for proteins, nucleic acids, and polysaccharides, they share
important features. Each polymer grows by the addition of a monomer onto the
end of a growing chain in a condensation reaction, in which one molecule of water
is lost with each subunit added (Figure 2–9). The stepwise polymerization of
monomers into a long chain is a simple way to manufacture a large, complex
molecule, because the subunits are added by the same reaction performed
over and over again by the same set of enzymes. Apart from some of the poly-
saccharides, most macromolecules are made from a limited set of monomers
that are slightly different from one another; for example, the 20 different amino
acids from which proteins are made. It is critical to life that the polymer chain
is not assembled at random from these subunits; instead, the subunits are
added in a precise order, or sequence. The elaborate mechanisms that allow
enzymes to accomplish this task are described in detail in Chapters 5 and 6.
Noncovalent Bonds Specify Both the Precise Shape of a
Macromolecule and Its Binding to Other Molecules
Most of the covalent bonds in a macromolecule allow rotation of the atoms they
join, giving the polymer chain great flexibility. In principle, this allows a macro-
molecule to adopt an almost unlimited number of shapes, or conformations, as
random thermal energy causes the polymer chain to writhe and rotate. However,
the shapes of most biological macromolecules are highly constrained because
of the many weak noncovalent bonds that form between different parts of the
same molecule. If these noncovalent bonds are formed in sufficient numbers,
the polymer chain can strongly prefer one particular conformation, determined
by the linear sequence of monomers in its chain. Most protein molecules
and many of the small RNA molecules found in cells fold tightly into a highly
preferred conformation in this way (Figure 2–10).
The four types of noncovalent interactions important in biological molecules
were presented earlier (see also Panel 2–3, pp. 98–99). In addition to folding
biological macromolecules into unique shapes, they can also add up to create a
strong attraction between two different molecules (see Figure 2–4). This form of
H2O
A
H + HO
B
CONDENSATION
energetically
unfavorable
H2O
A
B
HYDROLYSIS
A
H + HO
B
energetically
favorable
Figure 2–9 Condensation and hydrolysis as opposite reactions. The macromolecules of the cell
are polymers that are formed from subunits (or monomers) by a condensation reaction, and they
are broken down by hydrolysis. The condensation reactions are all energetically unfavorable; thus,
polymer formation requires an energy input, as will be described in the text.
SUBUNITMACROMOLECULE
sugarpolysaccharide
amino
acidprotein
nucleotidenucleic acid
Figure 2–8 Three families of
macromolecules. Each is a polymer
formed from small molecules (called
monomers) linked together by
covalent bonds. There are two types of
nucleic acid: RNA and DNA.
MBoC7 m2.08/2.0856
Chapter 2: Cell Chemistry and Bioenergetics
Figure 2–10 Proteins and RNA
molecules are folded into a particularly
stable three-dimensional shape, or
conformation. If the noncovalent bonds
maintaining the stable conformation are
disrupted, the molecule becomes a flexible
chain that loses its biological activity.
CONDITIONS
THAT DISRUPT
NONCOVALENT
BONDS
unstructured
polymer chains
a stable folded
conformation
molecular interaction provides for great specificity, inasmuch as the close multi-
point contacts required for strong binding make it possible for a macromolecule
to select out—through binding—just MBoC7
one ofe2.34/2.10
the many thousands of types of mole-
cules present inside a cell. Moreover, because the strength of the binding depends
on the number of noncovalent bonds that are formed, interactions of almost any
affinity are possible—allowing rapid dissociation where appropriate.
As we discuss next, binding of this type underlies all biological catalysis,
making it possible for proteins to function as enzymes. In addition, noncovalent
interactions allow macromolecules to be used to build larger structures, thereby
forming intricate machines with multiple moving parts that perform such com-
plex tasks as DNA replication and protein synthesis (Figure 2–11).
Summary
Living organisms are autonomous, self-propagating chemical systems. They are
formed from a distinctive and restricted set of small carbon-based molecules that
are essentially the same for every living species. Each of these small molecules is
composed of a set of atoms linked to each other in a precise configuration through
covalent bonds. The main categories are sugars, fatty acids, amino acids, and
nucleotides.
Most of the dry mass of a cell consists of macromolecules that have been pro-
duced as linear polymers of amino acids (proteins) or nucleotides (DNA and RNA),
covalently linked to each other in an exact order. Most of the protein molecules
and many of the RNAs fold into a particular conformation that is determined
SUBUNITS
amino acids
covalent
bonds
MACROMOLECULES
noncovalent
bonds
RNA molecule
nucleotides
MACROMOLECULAR
ASSEMBLY
ribosome
globular
protein
30 nm
Figure 2–11 Small molecules are covalently linked to form macromolecules, which in turn
can assemble through noncovalent interactions to form large complexes. Small molecules,
proteins, and a ribosome are drawn approximately to scale. Ribosomes are a central part of the
machinery that the cell uses to make proteins: each ribosome is formed as a complex of about
90 macromolecules (protein and RNA molecules).
MBoC7 e2.36/2.1157
CATALYSIS AND THE USE OF ENERGY BY CELLS
(A)
(B)
20 nm
(C)
50 nm
(D)
10 µ m
by their sequence of subunits. This folding process creates unique surfaces, and it
depends on a large set of weak attractions produced by noncovalent forces between
atoms. These forces are of four types: electrostatic attractions, hydrogen bonds,
van der Waals attractions, and an attraction between nonpolar groups caused by
their hydrophobic expulsion from water. The same set of weak forces governs the
specific binding of a macromolecule to both small molecules and other macro­
molecules, producing the myriad associations between biological molecules
that generate the structure and the chemistry of a cell. MBoC7 m2.12/2.12
CATALYSIS AND THE USE OF ENERGY BY CELLS
One property of living things above all makes them seem almost miraculously
different from nonliving matter: they create and maintain order in a universe
that is tending always to greater disorder (Figure 2–12). To create this order,
the cells in a living organism must perform a never-ending stream of chemical
reactions. In some of these reactions, small organic molecules—amino acids,
sugars, nucleo­tides, and lipids—are being taken apart or modified to supply
the many other small molecules that the cell requires. In other reactions, small
molecules are being used to construct an enormously diverse range of pro-
teins, nucleic acids, and other macromolecules that endow living systems
with all of their most distinctive properties. Each cell can be viewed as a tiny
chemical factory, performing many millions of reactions every second.
0.5 mm
(E)
Figure 2–12 Biological structures are
highly ordered. Well-defined, ornate, and
beautiful spatial patterns can be found
at every level of organization in living
organisms. In order of increasing size:
(A) protein molecules in the coat of a virus
(a parasite that, although not technically
alive, contains the same types of molecules
as those found in living cells); (B) the
regular array of microtubules seen in a
cross section of a sperm tail; (C) surface
contours of a pollen grain (a single cell);
(D) cross section of a fern stem, showing
the patterned arrangement of cells; and
(E) a spiral arrangement of leaves in a
succulent plant. (A, courtesy of Robert
Grant, Stéphane Crainic, and James M.
Hogle; B, courtesy of Lewis Tilney; C,
courtesy of Colin MacFarlane and Chris
Jeffree; D, courtesy of Jim Haseloff; E,
courtesy of Aron van de Selenib.)
Cell Metabolism Is Organized by Enzymes
The chemical reactions that a cell carries out would normally proceed at an appre-
ciable rate only at much higher temperatures than those existing inside cells. For
this reason, each reaction requires a specific boost in chemical reactivity. This
requirement is crucial, because it allows the cell to control its chemistry. The con-
trol is exerted through specialized biological catalysts. These are almost always
proteins called enzymes, although RNA catalysts also exist, called ribozymes. Each
enzyme accelerates, or catalyzes, just one of the many possible kinds of reactions
that a particular molecule might undergo. Enzyme-catalyzed reactions are con-
nected in series, so that the product of one reaction becomes the starting material,
or substrate, for the next (Figure 2–13). Long linear reaction pathways are in turn
linked to one another, forming a maze of interconnected reactions that enable
the cell to survive, grow, and reproduce.
moleculemoleculemoleculemoleculemoleculemolecule
ABCDEF
catalysis by
enzyme 1
catalysis by
enzyme 2
catalysis by
enzyme 3
catalysis by
enzyme 4
catalysis by
enzyme 5
ABBREVIATED AS
Figure 2–13 How a set of enzyme-catalyzed reactions generates a metabolic pathway. Each enzyme catalyzes a
particular chemical reaction, leaving the enzyme unchanged. In this example, a set of enzymes acting in series converts
molecule A to molecule F, forming a metabolic pathway. (For a diagram of many of the reactions in a human cell, abbreviated
as shown, see Figure 2–62.)
MBoC7 m2.13/2.13
20 mm58
Chapter 2: Cell Chemistry and Bioenergetics
useful
forms of
energy
ANABOLIC
PATHWAYS
CATABOLIC
PATHWAYS
food molecules
lost
heat
the many
building blocks
for biosynthesis
the many
molecules
that form
the cell
Figure 2–14 Schematic representation of the relationship between catabolic and anabolic
pathways in metabolism. Catabolism produces both the building blocks and the energy required
for biosynthesis. As indicated, a major portion of the energy stored in the chemical bonds of food
molecules is dissipated as heat. As also suggested in this diagram, the mass of food required by
any organism that derives all of its energy from catabolism is much greater than the mass of the
molecules that it can produce by anabolism.
Two opposing streams of chemical reactions occur in cells: (1) the catabolic
MBoC7 e3.02/2.14
pathways break down foodstuffs into
smaller molecules, thereby generating both
a useful form of energy for the cell and some of the small molecules that the cell
needs as building blocks; (2) the anabolic, or biosynthetic, pathways use the small
molecules plus the energy harnessed by catabolism to drive the synthesis of
the many other molecules that form the cell. Together these two sets of reactions
constitute the metabolism of the cell (Figure 2–14).
The many details of cell metabolism form the traditional subject of biochem-
istry. Most of these details need not concern us here. But the general principles
by which cells obtain energy from their environment and use it to create order
are central to cell biology. We begin with a discussion of why a constant input of
energy is needed to sustain all living things.
Biological Order Is Made Possible by the Release of Heat
Energy from Cells
The universal tendency of things to become disordered is a fundamental law of
physics—the second law of thermodynamics—which states that in the universe
or in any isolated system (a collection of matter that is completely isolated from
the rest of the universe), the degree of disorder always increases. This law has
such profound implications for life that we will restate it in several ways.
For example, we can present the second law in terms of probability by stating
that systems will change spontaneously toward those arrangements that have the
greatest probability. If we consider a box of 100 coins all lying heads-up, a series
of accidents that disturbs the box will tend to move the arrangement toward a
mixture of 50 heads and 50 tails. The reason is simple: there is a huge number
of possible arrangements of the individual coins in the mixture that can achieve
the 50–50 result, but only one possible arrangement that keeps all of the coins
oriented heads-up. Because the 50–50 mixture is therefore the most probable, we
say that it is more “disordered.” For the same reason, it is a common experience
that one’s living space will become increasingly disordered without intentional
effort: the movement toward disorder is a spontaneous process, requiring a
periodic effort to reverse it (Figure 2–15).
The amount of disorder in a system can be quantified and expressed as the
entropy of the system: the greater the disorder, the greater the entropy. Thus,
another way to express the second law of thermodynamics is to say that systems
will change spontaneously toward arrangements with greater entropy.
Living cells—by surviving, growing, and forming complex organisms—are
generating order and thus might appear to defy the second law of thermodynam-
ics. How is this possible? The answer is that a cell is not an isolated system: it
takes in energy from its environment in the form of the chemical bonds in food59
CATALYSIS AND THE USE OF ENERGY BY CELLS
Figure 2–15 An everyday illustration of
the spontaneous drive toward disorder.
Reversing this tendency toward disorder
requires an intentional effort and an input of
energy: it is not spontaneous. In fact, from
the second law of thermodynamics, we
can be certain that the human intervention
required will release enough heat to the
environment to more than compensate for
the reordering of the items in this room.
“SPONTANEOUS“ REACTION
as time elapses
ORGANIZED EFFORT REQUIRING ENERGY INPUT
or as photons from the Sun (or even, as in some chemosynthetic bacteria, from
inorganic molecules alone). It then uses this energy to generate order within
itself. Critically, during the chemical reactions that generate order, the cell con-
verts part of the energy it uses into heat. The heat is discharged into the cell’s
MBoC7 m2.15/2.15
environment and disorders the surroundings. As a result, the total entropy—that
of the cell plus its surroundings—increases, as demanded by the second law of
thermodynamics.
To understand the principles governing these energy conversions, think of a
cell surrounded by a sea of matter representing the rest of the universe. As the cell
lives and grows, it creates internal order. But it constantly releases heat energy as it
synthesizes molecules and assembles them into cell structures. Heat is energy in its
most disordered form—the random jostling of molecules. When the cell releases
heat to the sea, it increases the intensity of molecular motions there (thermal
motion)—thereby increasing the randomness, or disorder, of the sea. The second
law of thermodynamics is satisfied because the increase in the amount of order
inside the cell is always more than compensated for by an even greater decrease in
order (increase in entropy) in the surrounding sea of matter (Figure 2–16).
Where does the heat that the cell releases come from? Here we encounter
another important law of thermodynamics. The first law of thermodynamics
sea of matter
cell
HEAT
increased disorder
increased order
Figure 2–16 A simple thermodynamic
analysis of a living cell. In the diagram
on the left, the molecules of both the
cell and the rest of the universe (the sea
of matter) are depicted in a relatively
disordered state. In the diagram on the
right, the cell has taken in energy from
food molecules and released heat through
reactions that order the molecules the cell
contains. The heat released increases the
disorder in the environment around the cell
(depicted by jagged arrows and distorted
molecules, indicating increased molecular
motions caused by heat). As a result, if
enough heat is released, the second law
of thermodynamics—which states that
the amount of disorder in the universe
must always increase—is satisfied as
the cell grows and divides. For a detailed
discussion, see Panel 2–7 (pp. 106–107).60
Chapter 2: Cell Chemistry and Bioenergetics
falling brick has
kinetic energy
raised brick
has potential
energy due
to pull of
gravity
A
heat is released
when brick hits
the floor
potential energy due to position
kinetic energy
heat energy
+
two hydrogen
gas molecules
B
oxygen gas
molecule
rapid vibrations and
rotations of two newly
formed water molecules
rapid molecular
motions in H2O
(kinetic energy)
chemical-bond energy in H2 and O2
battery
–
heat dispersed to
surroundings
heat energy
fan
motor
–
+
+
wires
fan
C
chemical-bond energy
sunlight
D
electromagnetic (light) energy
electrical energy
chlorophyll
molecule
chlorophyll molecule
in excited state
high-energy electrons
kinetic energy
photosynthesis
chemical-bond energy
states that energy can be converted from one form to another, but that it cannot
MBoC7 e3.06/2.17
be created or destroyed. Figure 2–17 illustrates some interconversions between
different forms of energy. The amount of energy in different forms will change
as a result of the chemical reactions inside the cell, but the first law tells us that
the total amount of energy must always be the same. For example, an animal
cell takes in foodstuffs and converts some of the energy present in the chemi-
cal bonds between the atoms of these food molecules (chemical-bond energy)
into the random thermal motion of molecules (heat energy)—it is this heat that
keeps our bodies warm.
The cell cannot derive any benefit from the heat energy it releases unless
the heat-generating reactions inside the cell are directly linked to the processes
that generate molecular order. It is the tight coupling of heat production to
an increase in order that distinguishes the metabolism of a cell from the
wasteful burning of fuel in a fire. Later, we illustrate how this coupling occurs.
For now, it is sufficient to recognize this critical fact: a direct linkage of the
“controlled burning” of food molecules to the generation of biological order
Figure 2–17 Some interconversions
between different forms of energy.
(A) We can use the height and weight of
the brick to predict exactly how much
heat will be released when it hits the
floor. (B) The large amount of chemical-
bond energy released when water (H2O)
is formed from H2 and O2 is initially
converted to very rapid thermal motions
in the two new H2O molecules; however,
collisions with other H2O molecules almost
instantaneously spread this kinetic energy
evenly throughout the surroundings
(heat transfer), making the new H2O
molecules indistinguishable from all the
rest. (C) Through coupled processes
to be described later, cells can convert
chemical-bond energy into kinetic energy
to drive, for example, molecular motor
proteins; however, this occurs without
the intermediate conversion of chemical
energy to electrical energy that a man-
made appliance such as this fan requires.
(D) Some cells can also harvest the energy
from sunlight to form chemical bonds via
photosynthesis.61
CATALYSIS AND THE USE OF ENERGY BY CELLS
CELLULAR RESPIRATION
PHOTOSYNTHESIS
CO2 + H2O
O2
H2O
O2 + SUGARS
SUGARS + O2
CO2
CO2
PLANTS
ALGAE
SOME BACTERIA
SUGARS AND
OTHER ORGANIC
MOLECULES
H2O + CO2
O2
MOST
LIVING
ORGANISMS
H2O
USEFUL
CHEMICAL-
BOND
ENERGY
ENERGY
OF
SUNLIGHT
is required for cells to create and maintain an island of order in a universe
tending toward chaos.
MBoC7 m2.18/2.18
Cells Obtain Energy by the Oxidation of Organic Molecules
All animal and plant cells are powered by energy stored in the chemical bonds
of organic molecules, whether they are sugars that a plant has photosynthesized
as food for itself or the mixture of large and small molecules that an animal has
eaten. Organisms must extract this energy in usable form to live, grow, and repro-
duce. In both plants and animals, energy is extracted from food molecules by
a process of gradual oxidation, or controlled burning.
Earth’s atmosphere contains a great deal of oxygen, and in the presence of
oxygen the most energetically stable form of carbon is CO2 and that of hydro-
gen is H2O. A cell is therefore able to obtain energy from sugars or other organic
molecules by allowing their carbon and hydrogen atoms to combine with oxygen
to produce CO2 and H2O, respectively—a process called aerobic respiration.
Photosynthesis (discussed in detail in Chapter 14) and respiration are comple-
mentary processes (Figure 2–18). This means that the transactions between plants
and animals are not all one way. Plants, animals, and microorganisms have existed
together on this planet for so long that many of them have become an essential part
of the others’ environments. The oxygen released by photosynthesis is consumed
in the combustion of organic molecules during aerobic respiration. And some of
the CO2 molecules that are fixed today into organic molecules by photosynthesis
in a green leaf were yesterday released into the atmosphere by the respiration of an
animal—or by the respiration of a fungus or bacterium decomposing dead organic
matter. We therefore see that carbon utilization forms a huge cycle that involves the
biosphere (all of the living organisms on Earth) as a whole (Figure 2–19). Similarly,
atoms of nitrogen, phosphorus, and sulfur move between the living and nonliving
worlds in cycles that involve plants, algae, animals, fungi, and bacteria.
CO2 in atmosphere and water
CELL RESPIRATION
PHOTOSYNTHESIS
plants, algae,
bacteria
animals
FOOD
CHAIN
humus and dissolved
organic matter
sediments and
fossil fuels
Figure 2–18 Photosynthesis and
respiration as complementary processes
in the living world. Photosynthesis
converts the electromagnetic energy in
sunlight into chemical-bond energy in
sugars and other organic molecules.
Plants, algae, and cyanobacteria obtain
the carbon atoms that they need for this
purpose from atmospheric CO2 and the
hydrogen from water, producing sugars
and releasing O2 gas as a by-product.
The organic molecules produced by
photosynthesis in turn serve as food for
other organisms. Many of these organisms
carry out aerobic respiration, a process that
uses O2 to form CO2 from the same carbon
atoms that had been taken up as CO2 and
converted into sugars by photosynthesis.
In the process, the organisms that respire
obtain the chemical-bond energy that they
need to survive.
The first cells on Earth are thought
to have been capable of neither
photosynthesis nor respiration (discussed
in Chapter 14). However, photosynthesis
must have preceded respiration on Earth,
because there is strong evidence that
billions of years of photosynthesis were
required before O2 had been released in
sufficient quantity to create an atmosphere
rich in this gas. (Earth’s atmosphere
currently contains 21% O2.)
Figure 2–19 How carbon atoms cycle
through the biosphere. Individual
carbon atoms are incorporated into
organic molecules of the living world by
the photosynthetic activity of bacteria,
algae, and plants. They pass to animals,
microorganisms, and organic material in
soil and oceans in cyclic paths. CO2 is
restored to the atmosphere when organic
molecules are oxidized by cells during
respiration or burned by humans as fossil
fuels. In this diagram, the green arrow
denotes an uptake of CO2, whereas a red
arrow indicates CO2 release.
As indicated in Chapter 1, the total
biomass on Earth is estimated to contain
∼550 gigatons (1015 grams) of carbon
(Gt C), of which 450 Gt C are plants, 70 are
bacteria, 7 are archaea, and 2 are animals
(see Figure 1–14).Chapter 2: Cell Chemistry and Bioenergetics
62
(A)
_
+
e
atom 1
+
e
_
+
atom 2
FORMATION OF
A POLAR
COVALENT
BOND
(B)
_
+
partial
positive
charge (δ+)
oxidized
H methane
