Physical Principles of Diffusion Imaging

Thinesh Sivapatham and Elias R. Melhem

Introduction
------------

While a still body of water may appear static to the eye, water molecules are in constant random motion at a microscopic level. This is 
termed Brownian motion, and is a result of the thermal agitation of the water molecules. While Brownian motion is a microscopic 
phenomenon, it results in a macroscopically observable phenomenon known as diffusion. The diffusion of water molecules in the brain 
provides us with a sensitive window to its underlying physiology and structure. Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) of the brain was 
introduced into clinical use in the early 1990s, primarily in the detection of acute ischemic stroke [1–4]. Since that time, advances in 
technology have resulted in significant improvements in image quality, allowing the application of DWI to the evaluation of a variety of 
intracranial disease processes, such as infections, neoplasms, demyelinating processes, and trauma. The development of diffusion tensor 
imaging (DTI) has allowed mapping of white matter tracts in the brain, and is discussed elsewhere in this book. In this chapter, we 
review the physical principles of DWI, while the clinical applications of DWI are discussed in following chapters.

Brownian Motion and Molecular Diffusion
----------------------------------------

In 1827, Robert Brown, a Scottish botanist, discovered the random and constant motion of pollen grains suspended in water while studying 
them under a light microscope [5]. Brown initially believed this motion to be related to the male
sexual cells of plants, but after further investigation of both organic and inorganic materials, he found this motion to be a general 
property of small particles suspended in solution. We currently know that this motion is attributed to the constant motion of the water 
molecules that the particles are suspended in. This motion is known as Brownian motion, or diffusion, and is a result of constant random 
microscopic molecular motion due to thermal agitation. The molecular motion is related to the thermal kinetic energy (Ekin ), of the 
molecules, which is proportional to the temperature, T: Ekin = (3/2)kB T; where k B = 1.38 × 10 − 23 J/K is the Boltzmann constant. 
This Brownian motion also depends upon the size of the particles, density, and viscosity of the medium.

Diffusion is a naturally occurring transport process at the molecular level that describes the spread of particles through random 
motion. This mixing or mass transport occurs as a result of collisions between molecules in liquids and gases rather than by bulk motion 
as is necessary for other transport mechanisms such as convection or dispersion. When there is a concentration gradient, particles 
spread from areas of higher concentration to areas of lower concentration until their distribution becomes equilibrate. This results in 
a net flux of particles with a magnitude that is proportional to the concentration gradient and to the diffusion coefficient, as 
described by Fick’s First Law and represented by the following equation:

J = D∗ ∇ C

(1.1)

where J is the flux density, D is diffusion coefficient, and ∇C is change in concentration. The diffusion coefficient is a constant for 
a given substance in a given medium of known viscosity at a given temperature. Diffusion can also occur in the absence of a 
concentration gradient, but in this scenario the diffusive fluxes cancel each other out, resulting in no net flux.

The concept of molecular diffusion was first formally described by Einstein in 1905 [6]. In a contained volume of water, each water 
molecule undergoes random motion as part of the diffusion process. This phenomenon of thermal

motion of water molecules in a medium that itself consists primarily of water is termed self-diffusion. The path of any single water 
molecule is completely random and would be impossible to predict, limited only by the boundaries of the container. Einstein was able to 
prove that the squared displacement of molecules from their starting point could be described by the equation:

r 2 = 6 Dt

(1.2)

where <r2 > refers to the mean squared displacement of the molecules from their original location, t is the diffusion time, and D is the 
diffusion coefficient for the particular substance being studied. The diffusion coefficient is typically expressed in units of mm2 /s 
and relates the average displacement of a molecule over an area to the observation time; higher diffusion constants infer increased 
mobility of water molecules. The diffusion coefficient of water at body temperature (37 °C) is 3 × 10 − 3 mm2 /s. The distribution of 
squared displacements of free water molecules is typically a Gaussian (bellshaped) function with peak at zero displacement, indicating 
that most molecules have the same position at the starting point and at time t [7, 8]. The probability of molecular displacement by a 
given distance from the starting position is the same regardless of the direction of measurement, with standard deviation proportional 
to the diffusion coefficient and time measured.

Diffusion-weighted (DW) magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) utilizes Brownian motion to study the movement of water in vivo, thereby 
garnering information about the underlying tissue structure of the brain. DW MRI does not measure the diffusion coefficient directly, 
but rather the effect of the mean displacement of water molecules within each three-dimensional (3-D) volume element, or voxel, on the 
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) signal. One might ask: If the diffusion coefficient of water at body temperature is a constant, then 
how can we use this information to evaluate tissue structure? We must remember that in vivo, water molecules do not freely diffuse as 
they would in a medium of water alone. In tissues, the movement of water occurs largely in the extracellular space, and their movement 
is modified by interactions with cell membranes and macromolecules, i.e., the underlying tissue structure of the brain. Additionally, 
the movement of water molecules in vivo due to diffusion cannot be distinguished from the movement of water molecules from other sources 
such as active transport, pressure gradients, ionic interactions, and changes in membrane permeability. As a result, the overall 
movement of water molecules in the brain is reduced as compared to their movement in free

water, and only the “apparent diffusion coefficient” (ADC) can be calculated [7–9]. The average ADC in the brain is approximately 0.7 × 
10 -3 mm2 /s [10], about four times smaller than the diffusion coefficient in free water.

Diffusion Encoding and the Stejskal-Tanner Equation

Shortly after Bloch and Purcell discovered the NMR phenomenon [11–13], Hahn reported his findings that the NMR spin-echo was sensitive 
to the effects of diffusion [14]. He noted that the random thermal motion of the spins would reduce the amplitude of the observed 
spin-echo signal as a result of the dephasing that occurs in the presence of magnetic field inhomogeneity, which results in local 
magnetic field gradients. Building on these observations, Carr and Purcell proposed NMR sequences using constant gradients to sensitize 
the NMR spin-echo to the effects of diffusion, and developed a mathematical framework to measure the diffusion coefficient from these 
sequences [15]. In 1956, Torrey modified Bloch’s magnetization equations to include the effects of molecular diffusion [16]; the 
Bloch-Torrey equations describe how net magnetization depends on several factors, including longitudinal and transverse magnetization, 
as well as diffusion.

In their seminal paper on the spin-diffusion experiment in 1965, Stejskal and Tanner described the theory of the pulsed gradient 
spin-echo (PGSE), which replaced the steady-state gradients used by Carr and Purcell with short-duration gradient pulses [17]. This 
resulted in much improved sensitivity to diffusion by distinguishing the encoding time (pulse duration) and the diffusion time. This 
also allowed the direct measurement of the diffusion function and paved the way for quantitative measurements of the diffusion 
coefficient. In the presence of a magnetic field, static spins accumulate phase shifts according to the equation:

Φ ( t ) = γ B0t + ∫ G ( t ) . X ( t ) dt

(1.3)

The first term (γB0t) in the equation represents the phase accumulation owing to the static magnetic field, while the second term 
(∫G(t).X(t)dt) reflects the effect of a magnetic field gradient. The phase accumulation owing to the gradient is proportional to the 
strength of the field gradient, spatial location of the spin, and the duration of the gradient pulse.

In their experiment, Stejskal and Tanner sensitized a standard spin-echo T2-weighted pulse sequence to diffusion by adding a pair of 
diffusion gradients along the same

axis both before and after the 180° refocusing pulse [17]. The basic idea is to excite the spins with a 90° radiofrequency (RF) pulse, 
encode the spin position with a time-constant magnetic field gradient of duration δ, invert the spin phase with a 180° refocusing pulse, 
apply a second magnetic field gradient equal in intensity and duration to the first gradient at a time Δ after the first gradient, and 
then acquire the echo at time TE—echo time. The application of a linear gradient to a homogeneous magnetic field results in phase shifts 
of the spins along that axis, which is position dependent; this phase dispersion leads to signal loss. However, the application of a 
second gradient equal to the first in magnitude and duration but opposite in direction can refocus the phase changes. The first gradient 
is called the dephasing gradient, while the second is called the rephasing gradient [18].

If a spin is stationary between the applications of the two gradient pulses, the net effect of the gradients is zero and the spin 
maintains its signal intensity. This explains the relatively high signal intensity on DWI seen in the setting of cytotoxic edema, where 
there is a relative increase in intracellular water content and water molecules are “trapped” inside the cells (i.e., unable to diffuse 
freely) and relative decrease in the size of the extracellular compartment [1925]. For a spin that moves along the axis of the diffusion 
gradient, phase accumulation due to the two gradients is no longer equal so the rephasing is incomplete. As a result, intravoxel 
dephasing occurs and there is a loss of signal intensity; the greater the distance the spin moves along the axis of the gradient, the 
greater the signal loss [8, 14, 16, 17]. This explains the relatively low signal intensity seen on DWI in the normal brain parenchyma, 
and even lower signal intensity in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) spaces, where water can diffuse the most freely.

The effects of signal loss due to diffusion can be explained by the Stejskal-Tanner equation:

S = S 0 exp ( −bD )

(1.4)

where S is the signal intensity observed in a given voxel with a diffusion gradient applied, S 0 is the signal intensity of the same 
voxel in the absence of a diffusion gradient, b is the diffusion sensitivity factor, and D is the diffusion coefficient. The diffusion 
sensitivity factor (b) is a function of the strength, duration, and temporal spacing of the diffusionsensitizing gradients, and can be 
expressed by the following equation:

b = γ 2 G2 δ 2 ( ∆ − δ / 3 )

(1.5)

In this equation, γ is the gyromagnetic ratio (the ratio of magnetic moment to angular moment of a nuclear spin, a constant), G is the 
amplitude of the diffusion gradient (usually measured in milliteslas per meter), δ is the duration of the diffusion gradient pulse 
(measured in milliseconds), and Δ the time interval between the dephasing and rephasing gradient pulses (also measured in milliseconds). 
The diffusion sensitivity factor (b) is measured in units of seconds/mm2 . Raising the b-value increases the degree of diffusion 
weighting (i.e., increases the signal loss caused by the diffusion of water molecules along the direction that the gradient was applied; 
Fig. 1.1). The most effective ways to increase diffusion sensitivity, as seen in Eq. (1.3), are to increase gradient amplitude (G) and 
gradient duration (δ), as these parameters have a quadratic effect on b. Typical b-values in clinical DWI range from 0 to 1500 s/mm2 . 
However, it should be emphasized that higher diffusion weightings increase exponentially the contrast between tissues with different 
diffusion coefficients, but at the same time they decrease the overall signal intensity and signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) [26, 27].

Diffusion Anisotropy

Isotropic diffusion refers to a condition where molecular motion is the same in all directions. Since the diffusivity is independent of 
direction in this scenario, the displacement distribution is Gaussian and can be conceptualized as a sphere (i.e., if the center of the 
sphere is the starting point of a water molecule, the probability of diffusing any given distance from the center is equal in all 
directions) [7, 8, 28].

Biological tissues are heterogeneous in their structure and consist of various compartments and barriers of various permeability. 
Neuronal tissue, in particular, is highly fibrillar, with tightly packed and coherently aligned axons surrounded by a network of glial 
cells that are often themselves organized in bundles. The movement of water molecules in these tissues is not isotropic, but rather has 
a propensity to be greater in a direction parallel to the fiber tracts than perpendicular to it. Diffusion in this scenario varies with 
direction,

and is described as anisotropic [29–33]. The associated displacement distribution of anisotropic diffusion is not Gaussian or spherical, 
but rather ellipsoid (or even more complex if the underlying tissues contain fibers with various orientations). This anisotropy can be 
explained by the diffusion tensor model, and is discussed further in the chapter on diffusion tensor imaging (DTI).

While isotropic diffusion can be seen in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) spaces and in the gray matter of the adult cerebral cortex, 
diffusion in the white matter is primarily anisotropic. Multiple explanations have been suggested for the mechanisms underlying 
diffusion anisotropy of white matter, including the myelin sheath, axonal direction, axonal transport, and local susceptibility 
gradients [34–36]. Myelin itself does not appear to be necessary for diffusion anisotropy, as experiments have shown anisotropic 
diffusion in the absence of myelin [37, 38]. A series of experiments in the 1990s excluded the effects of susceptibility-induced 
gradients, axonal cytoskeleton, and fast-axonal transport as the etiology of anisotropy in white matter [39–41]. Current evidence 
suggests that the presence of intact cell membranes is the tissue component predominantly responsible for the anisotropy of molecular 
diffusion in white matter, while the degree of myelination and cellular density serve to modulate anisotropy [42].

Calculating the ADC

Since diffusion in the brain is approximated by the ADC rather than by direct measurement of the diffusion coefficient, Eq. (1.2) might 
be better represented as:

S i = S 0 exp ( −bADC i )

(1.6)

where S i is the signal intensity in a given voxel with the diffusion-sensitization gradient applied along direction i, and ADC i is the 
ADC in the i direction. In an isotropic environment, the direction of the gradient pulse is irrelevant, since the ADC i would be 
identical for all directions i, and a single (scalar) diffusion gradient application is sufficient to calculate the ADC. Higher ADC 
values result in lower signal intensity S i in the DWI, while reduced ADC values result in higher signal intensity. In addition to 
contrast due to differences in ADC, the long TE of a DWI pulse sequence makes it inherently sensitive to T2-contrast as well. 
T2-prolongation in pathologic tissues can elevate the DWI signal intensity in the absence of reduced ADC values [43]. This 
“T2-shinethrough” effect results in the DWI hyperintensity being less specific than reduced ADC values on ADC maps in the measurement of 
true restricted diffusion in tissues (Fig. 1.2).

In order to remove the T2-effects, the diffusion experiment is repeated for each gradient direction with a low

b-value and high b-value (commonly 0 s/mm 2 and 1000 s/ mm 2 in clinical practice). The low b-value sequence essentially yields a 
T2-weighted image. The DW image S i (with b = 1000 s/mm2 ) can then be divided by the T2-weighted image S 0 (with b = 0 s/mm2 ) to 
remove the T2-weighting effects and produce an exponential image, also known as an attenuation coefficient map, exponential 
diffusion-weighted image, or the attenuation factor map (shown in Fig. 1.3). Areas of restricted diffusion on these maps will 
demonstrate increased signal intensity, similar to DWI.

ADC values can also be calculated by solving for ADC in Eq. (1.7):

ADC i = −ln ( S i / S 0 ) / b

(1.7)

where ln is the natural logarithm. Instead of deriving the ADC value mathematically, however, the ADC is typically determined 
graphically by obtaining two image sets (again, low b-value and high b-value image sets) and plotting the natural logarithm of S i 
versus b for the two b-values; the ADC is then determined from the slope of that line.

Biological tissue can be considered a combination of intra- and extracellular compartments in which the water molecule is in a state of 
continuous exchange between these two compartments. The observed signal attenuation in the diffusion experiment therefore depends on the 
rate of exchange and the diffusion time. In the limit of slow exchange, water spins remain within their respective compartments during 
the diffusion time and signal attenuation follows a bi-exponential behavior. This bi-exponential behavior is given by the equation:

S = S 0   f 1 exp ( −b1 ADC 1 ) + f 2 exp ( −b 2 ADC 2 )  

(1.8)

where f 1 and f 2 are the volume fractions of water spins within each of the two compartments and f 1 + f 2 = 1; ADC 1 and ADC 2 are the 
apparent diffusion coefficients in the two compartments.

On the other hand, in the limit of fast exchange with complete redistribution of water between the two compartments during the diffusion 
time, the signal attenuation follows a single exponential behavior given by the equation:

S / S 0 = exp ( −b ∗ ADC )

(1.9)

The observed apparent diffusion coefficient for a twocompartment system includes contributions from both the intracellular and 
extracellular environments and is approximated by the equation:

ADC = f1 ADC 1 + f 2 ADC2 

(1.10)

In most practical situations, the bi-exponential behavior of signal attenuation is not observed. Therefore, it is a common practice to 
fit the DWI data to the single exponential decay model.

Isotropic DWI and Trace ADC

Diffusion gradient pulses are applied in one direction at a time, with the resulting DW image giving both directional and magnitude 
information about the ADC. This would be sufficient if imaging an isotropic tissue, since the ADC would be the same regardless of the 
direction of the diffusion gradient. When imaging an anisotropic tissue like the white matter of the brain, however, interpretation of 
the DWI would be challenging if only a single gradient direction were probed, due to the variable signal intensity of white matter 
tracts depending on their orientation relative to the direction of the diffusion gradient. While the diffusion anisotropy discussed in 
the previous section can be exploited to image fiber tracts in DTI, the directional effects of anisotropy are undesirable in routine 
clinical DWI.

In order to overcome the directional influences of the diffusion gradient in anisotropic tissues, four separate scalar image 
acquisitions are required: one without a diffusionsensitizing gradient (S0 , where b = 0 s/mm2 ), and three with the diffusion gradients 
applied in three orthogonal directions x, y, and z (which will be called Sx , Sy , and Sz ). To create an image related only to the 
magnitude of the ADC, the DW images acquired with the gradient pulses applied in three orthogonal planes can be multiplied, and the cube 
root of that product yields a DW image weighted with diffusion magnitude information alone and directional information removed, called 
the “isotropic DWI” (SDWI ):

S DWI = ( Sx Sy S z )1 / 3 

(1.11)

The ADC derived from application of the gradients in three orthogonal planes, called the “trace ADC” (simply called ADC below), is the 
average of the ADCs from each of the planes (Fig. 1.3):

ADC = ( ADC x + ADC y + ADC z ) / 3

(1.12)

The images submitted to the radiologist for interpretation in the clinical setting are typically the isotropic DWI and trace ADC images.

DWI of the Normal Brain

As mentioned previously, the average ADC in the brain is approximately 0.7 × 10 − 3 mm2 /s; more specifically, mean diffusivities in 
the adult brain range from 0.67 to 0.83 × 10− 3  mm2 /s in gray matter, and 0.64 to 0.71 × 10 − 3 mm2 /s in white matter [10]. Because 
the ADC values for gray and white matter are so similar, there is essentially no contrast between gray and white matter on the ADC map 
or exponential image. The subtle gray–white matter contrast that can be seen on the DWI can be attributed to T2-effects, which makes it 
impor-

tant to concomitantly view the ADC map or exponential image to evaluate for true restricted diffusion.

In neonates and young children, the ADC is initially much higher in rapidly developing gray matter structures like the thalamus and 
basal ganglia, and can be more than twice as high in the slowly developing white matter regions [44, 45]. This can be attributed to the 
relatively high water content in the immature brain, with relative paucity of myelinated neurons. ADC values decrease rapidly over the 
first 2 years of brain development, and continue to decrease gradually through childhood, adolescence, and into young adulthood [46–52]. 
Due to the higher ADC values in neonates and infants compared to adults [45–48], it is common to reduce the diffusion sensitivity factor 
(b) in this age group to 600 or 700 s/mm2 , compared to the 1000 s/mm2  typically used in adults. In the aging but otherwise healthy 
brain, mild increases can be seen in the ADC, particularly in white matter [53–58]. Engelter et al. found a significant correlation 
between the average ADC of white matter and age, with patients 60 years of age or older having increased ADC compared to those under the 
age of 60; a similar trend was seen in the average ADC of the thalamus [55]. Chen et al. found that the average ADC increases by 3% per 
decade after the age of 40 [56]. This has been attributed to loss of myelinated neurons and structural changes seen with aging.

Current DWI Techniques

The movement of water molecules detected by DWI occurs on a length scale of micrometers that is significantly larger than intracellular 
distances, but much smaller than the millimeter scale of voxel size in typical magnetic resonance (MR) images. The original PGSE 
T2-weighted sequence described by Stejskal and Tanner was sensitive to even minimal bulk patient motion, which was enough to obscure the 
much more miniscule molecular motion of diffusion. As MRI technology has improved and high-performance gradients have been developed, 
DWI is now typically performed using spin-echo single-shot echo-planar imaging (SS-EPI) techniques. With this type of pulse sequence, an 
entire two-dimensional (2-D) image can be formed from a single RF excitation pulse (hence the term “single-shot”). Images can be 
acquired in a fraction of a second, minimizing artifacts related to patient motion. Additionally, the SS-EPI technique has a relatively 
high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR); this is an important advantage in DWI, as high b-value diffusion gradients cause a significant loss of 
signal intensity (see Eq. (1.4)). Using the SS-EPI technique, DW imaging of the brain can typically be completed in 1–2 min, beneficial 
in clinical settings where acutely ill and often uncooperative patients (i.e., hyperacute stroke patients) are being imaged.

Limitations of the SS-EPI technique include low spatial resolution, blurring effects of T2*- and T2-decay, and sensitivity to artifacts. 
Matrix size using the single-shot technique is limited to 128 × 128 for a typical DWI using current MRI hardware and software, compared 
to matrix sizes of 256 × 192 or larger for standard T1- and T2-weighted sequences. Blurring of T2*- and T2-weighted contrast occurs 
during image readout due to the extended echo-train length. SS-EPI is also sensitive to artifacts due to Nyquist ghosting, chemical 
shift, and particularly magnetic field inhomogeneities caused by local susceptibility differences between adjacent structures. As 
stronger and faster gradients are developed to improve DWI, problems such as eddy currents and mechanical vibration may be exacerbated, 
resulting in additional artifacts. These artifacts are explained in detail in reviews by Le Bihan et al. [59], and by Mukherjee et al. 
[60].

The development of multichannel coils and parallel imaging has also led to improvements in DWI. Compared to standard head RF coils, 
which have a uniform sensitivity throughout their imaging volume, the newer multichannel phased-array RF coils have increased 
sensitivity around their periphery than at their center, resulting in improved SNR in the cerebral cortex and, therefore, improved DW 
images. These coils also allow parallel imaging on modern MR scanners due to their multiple independent receiver channels. Parallel 
imaging techniques can be used to shorten the echotrain length of EPI, thereby reducing the susceptibilityinduced and blurring artifacts 
that typically occur with extended echo trains. The shorter readout may also increase SNR by decreasing the TE.

Alternatives to SS-EPI DWI include variations of fast spin-echo (FSE) or turbo spin-echo (TSE) imaging, multishot EPI, spiral imaging, 
and line-scan imaging techniques [60, 61]. SS-FSE and half-Fourier acquired single-shot turbo spin-echo (HASTE) are ultrafast sequences 
that limit artifacts related to bulk patient motion similar to SS-EPI, but with reduced susceptibility and chemical shift artifacts 
compared to SS-EPI. However, they require longer scan times due to their low SNR compared with SS-EPI, and therefore have not become 
popular techniques for brain DWI imaging. Multishot techniques also confer a reduction in susceptibility artifacts compared with SS-EPI, 
but scan times are longer, which makes these methods more sensitive to bulk patient motion. One multishot FSE technique reduces motion 
artifacts by continually oversampling the center of k-space, and is called periodically rotated overlapping parallel lines with enhanced 
reconstruction (PROPELLER). This technique improves detection of small acute infarcts, particularly at the skull base and in the 
posterior fossa, where SS-EPI techniques have significant susceptibility-induced distortion. Due to much longer scanning times, however, 
the technique has not surpassed SS-EPI for routine clinical DWI.

Conclusion

From the observation of Brownian motion in 1827 to the description of molecular diffusion by Einstein in 1905, and the application of 
these principles to DW MRI, a great deal has been learned about the movement of water molecules in the brain (Table 1.1). DWI is a 
powerful tool that provides a great deal of information about the underlying structure and physiology of the brain that is not provided 
with standard T1- and T2-weighted imaging techniques. DWI was first

routinely used in brain imaging for the detection of acute ischemia, and is now an essential part of the imaging evaluation of patients 
with acute stroke. The applications of DWI in neuroimaging are extensive, and include the evaluation of intracranial infections, 
neoplasms, demyelinating processes, and trauma. These will be discussed in the following chapter. DWI techniques can also be used to 
evaluate the fiber tracts of the brain, and these techniques and applications are discussed elsewhere in this book. As MRI technology 
advances and improvements are made in imaging hardware and software, newer techniques and sequences may provide more sensitive DW images 
with reduction in the artifacts inherent in current DWI techniques.

References

1. Moseley ME, Cohen Y, Mintorovitch J, Chileuitt L, Shimizu H, Kucharczyk J, et al. Early detection of regional cerebral ischemia in 
cats: comparison of diffusion- and T2-weighted MRI and spectroscopy. Magn Reson Med. 1990;14:330–46.

2. Chien D, Kwong KK, Gress DR, Buonanno FS, Buxton RB, Rosen BR. MR diffusion imaging of cerebral infarction in humans. AJNR Am J 
Neuroradiol. 1992;13:1097–102.

3. Warach S, Chien D, Li W, Ronthal M, Edelman RR. Fast magnetic resonance diffusion-weighted imaging of acute human stroke. Neurology. 
1992;42:1717–23.

4. van Everdingen KJ, van der Grong J, Kappelle LJ, Ramos LM, Mali WP. Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging in acute stroke. 
Stroke. 1998;29(9):1783–90.

5. Brown R. A brief account of microscopical observations made in the months of June, July and August 1827 on the particles contained in 
the pollen of plants, and on the general existence of active molecules in organic and inorganic bodies. Philos Mag. 1828;4:161.

6. Einstein A. Investigations on the theory of Brownian motion.

19. Sevick RJ, Kanda F, Mintorovitch J, Arieff AI, Kucharczyk J, Tsuruda JS, et al. Cytotoxic brain edema: assessment with 
diffusion-weighted MR imaging. Radiology. 1992;185(3):687–90.

20. Ebisu T, Naruse S, Horikawa Y, Ueda S, Tanaka C, Uto M, Umeda M, Higuchi T. Discrimination between different types of white matter 
edema with diffusion-weighted MR imaging. J Magn Reson Imaging. 1993;3(6):863–8.

21. Schaefer PW, Buonanno FS, Gonzalez RG, Schwamm LH. Diffusion-weighted imaging discriminates between cytotoxic and vasogenic edema in 
a patient with eclampsia. Stroke. 1997;28:1082–5.

22. Schwartz R, Mulkern R, Gudbjartsson H, Jolesz F. Diffusionweighted MR imaging in hypertensive encephalopathy: clues to pathogenesis. 
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 1998;19:859–62.

23. Ay H, Buonanno FS, Schaefer PW, Le DA, Wang B, Gonzalez RG, Koroshetz WJ. Posterior leukoencephalopathy without severe hypertension: 
utility of diffusion-weighted MRI. Neurology. 1998;51:1369–76.

24. Mukherjee P, McKinstry RC. Reversible posterior leukoencephalopathy syndrome: evaluation with diffusion-tensor MR imaging. 
Radiology. 2001;219:756–65.

25. Provenzale JM, Petrella JR, Cruz LC Jr, Wong JC, Engelter S, Barboriak DP. Quantitative assessment of diffusion abnormalities in 
posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2001;22:1455–61.

26. Chen PE, Simon JE, Hill MD, Sohn CH, Dickhoff P, Morrish WF, et al. Acute ischemic stroke: accuracy of diffusion-weighted MR 
imaging–effects of b value and cerebrospinal fluid suppression. Radiology. 2006;238(1):232–9.

27. Kim HJ, Choi CG, Lee DH, Lee JH, Kim SJ, Suh DC. High-b-value diffusion-weighted MR imaging of hyperacute ischemic stroke at

1.5T. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2005;26(2):208–15.

28. Le Bihan D. Looking into the functional architecture of the brain with diffusion MRI. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2003;4(6):469–80.

29. Cleveland GG, Chang DC, Hazlewood CF, Rorschach HE. Nuclear magnetic resonance measurement of skeletal muscle: anisotropy of the 
diffusion coefficient of the intracellular water. Biophys J. 1976;16(9):1043–53.

New York: Dover; 1956.

7. Jones DK. Studying connections in the living human brain with diffusion MRI. Cortex. 2008;44(8):936–52.

8. Hagmann P, Jonasson L, Maeder P, Thiran JP, Wedeen VJ, Meuli

R. Understanding diffusion MR imaging techniques: from scalar diffusion-weighted imaging to diffusion tensor imaging and beyond. 
Radiographics. 2006;26(Suppl 1):205–23.

9. Schaefer PW, Grant PE, Gonzalez RG. Diffusion-weighted MR imaging of the brain. Radiology. 2000;217(2):331–45.

10. Pierpaoli C, Jezzard P, Basser PJ, Barnett A, Di Chiro

G. Diffusion tensor MR imaging of the human brain. Radiology. 1996;201:637–48.

11. Bloch F. Nuclear induction. Phys Rev. 1946;70:460–74.

12. Bloch F, Hansen WW, Packard M. Nuclear induction. Phys Rev.

30. Moseley ME, Cohen Y, Kucharczyk J, Mintorovitch J, Asgari HS, Wendland MF, Tsuruda J, Norman D. Diffusion-weighted MR imaging of 
anisotropic water diffusion in cat central nervous system. Radiology. 1990;176(2):439–45.

31. Moseley ME, Kucharczyk J, Asgari HS, Norman D. Anisotropy in diffusion-weighted MRI. Magn Reson Med. 1991;19(2):321–6.

32. Doran M, Hajnal JV, Van Bruggen N, King MD, Young IR, Bydder GM. Normal and abnormal white matter tracts shown by MR imaging using 
directional diffusion weighted sequences. J Comput Assist Tomogr. 1990;14(6):865–73.

33. Chenevert TL, Brunberg JA, Pipe JG. Anisotropic diffusion in human white matter: demonstration with MR techniques in vivo. 
Radiology. 1990;177(2):401–5.

1946;69:127.

34. Thomsen C, Henriksen O, Ring P. In vivo measurement of water self-diffusion in the human brain by magnetic resonance imaging. Acta 
Radiol. 1987;28(3):353–61.

13. Purcell EM, Torrey HC, Pound RV. Resonance absorption by nuclear magnetic moments in a solid. Phys Rev. 1946;69:37.

14. Hahn EL. Spin echoes. Phys Rev. 1950;80:580–94.

15. Carr HY, Purcell EM. Effects of diffusion on free precession in nuclear magnetic resonance experiments. Phys Rev. 1954;94:630–8.

16. Torrey HC. Bloch equations with diffusion terms. Phys Rev.

35. Hong X, Dixon WT. Measuring diffusion in inhomogeneous systems in imaging mode using antisymmetric sensitizing gradients. J Magn 
Reson. 1992;99:561–70.

1956;104:563–35.

36. Lian J, Williams DS, Lowe IJ. Magnetic resonance imaging in the presence of background gradients and imaging of background 
gradients. J Magn Reson Ser. 1994;106:65–74.

17. Stejskal EO, Tanner JE. Spin diffusion measurements: spin echoes in the presence of a time-dependent field gradient. J Chem Phys. 
1965;42:288–92.

18. Mori S, Barker PB. Diffusion magnetic resonance imaging: its principle and applications. Anat Rec. 1999;257(3):102–9.

37. Wimberger DM, Roberts TP, Barkovich AJ, Prayer LM, Moseley ME, Kucharczyk J. Identification of “premyelination” by diffusionweighted 
MRI. J Comput Assist Tomogr. 1995;19(1):28–33.

38. Prayer D, Roberts T, Barkovich AJ, Prayer L, Kucharczyk J, Moseley M, Arieff A. Diffusion-weighted MRI of myelina-

tion in the rat brain following treatment with gonadal hormones. Neuroradiology. 1997;39(5):320–5.

39. Beaulieu C, Allen PS. Determinants of anisotropic water diffusion in nerves. Magn Reson Med. 1994;31(4):394–400.

40. Beaulieu C, Allen PS. Water diffusion in the giant axon of the squid: implications for diffusion-weighted MRI of the nervous system. 
Magn Reson Med. 1994;32(5):579–83.

41. Beaulieu C, Allen PS. An in vitro evaluation of the effects of local magnetic-susceptibility-induced gradients on anisotropic water 
diffusion in nerve. Magn Reson Med. 1996;36(1):39–44.

42. Beaulieu C. The basis of anisotropic water diffusion in the nervous system - a technical review. NMR Biomed. 2002;15(7):435–55.

43. Burdette JH, Elster AD, Ricci PE. Acute cerebral infarction: quantification of spin-density and T2 shine-through phenomena on 
diffusion-weighted MR images. Radiology. 1999;212(2):333–9.

44. Hüppi PS, Maier SE, Peled S, Zientara GP, Barnes PD, Jolesz FA, Volpe JJ. Microstructural development of human newborn cerebral 
white matter assessed in vivo by diffusion tensor magnetic resonance imaging. Pediatr Res. 1998;44(4):584–90.

45. Neil JJ, Shiran SI, McKinstry RC, Schefft GL, Snyder AZ, Almli CR, Akbudak E, Aronovitz JA, Miller JP, Lee BC, Conturo TE. Normal 
brain in human newborns: apparent diffusion coefficient and diffusion anisotropy measured by using diffusion tensor MR imaging. 
Radiology. 1998;209(1):57–66.

46. Mukherjee P, Miller JH, Shimony JS, Conturo TE, Lee BC, Almli CR, McKinstry RC. Normal brain maturation during childhood: 
developmental trends characterized with diffusion-tensor MR imaging. Radiology. 2001;221(2):349–58.

47. Mukherjee P, McKinstry RC. Diffusion tensor imaging and tractography of human brain development. Neuroimaging Clin N Am. 
2006;16(1):19–43.

48. Mukherjee P, Miller JH, Shimony JS, Philip JV, Nehra D, Snyder AZ, Conturo TE, Neil JJ, McKinstry RC. Diffusion-tensor MR imaging of 
gray and white matter development during normal human brain maturation. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2002;23(9):1445–56.

49. McGraw P, Liang L, Provenzale JM. Evaluation of normal agerelated changes in anisotropy during infancy and childhood as shown by 
diffusion tensor imaging. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2002;179(6):1515–22.

50. Schneider JF, Il’yasov KA, Hennig J, Martin E. Fast quantitative diffusion-tensor imaging of cerebral white matter from the neonatal 
period to adolescence. Neuroradiology. 2004;46(4):258–66.

51. Snook L, Paulson LA, Roy D, Phillips L, Beaulieu C. Diffusion tensor imaging of neurodevelopment in children and young adults. 
NeuroImage. 2005;26(4):1164–73.

52. Hermoye L, Saint-Martin C, Cosnard G, Lee SK, Kim J, Nassogne MC, Menten R, Clapuyt P, Donohue PK, Hua K, Wakana S, Jiang H, van 
Zijl PC, Mori S. Pediatric diffusion tensor imaging: normal database and observation of the white matter maturation in early childhood. 
NeuroImage. 2006;29(2):493–504.

53. Gideon P, Thomsen C, Henriksen O. Increased self-diffusion of brain water in normal aging. J Magn Reson Imaging. 1994;4(2):185–8.

54. Chun T, Filippi CG, Zimmerman RD, Uluğ AM. Diffusion changes in the aging human brain. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2000;21(6):1078–83.

55. Engelter ST, Provenzale JM, Petrella JR, DeLong DM, MacFall JR. The effect of aging on the apparent diffusion coefficient of normal 
appearing white matter. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2000;175:425–30.

56. Chen ZG, Li TQ, Hindmarsh T. Diffusion tensor trace mapping in normal adult brain using single-shot EPI technique. A methodological 
study of the aging brain. Acta Radiol. 2001;42(5):447–58.

57. Nusbaum AO, Tang CY, Buchsbaum MS, Wei TC, Atlas SW. Regional and global changes in cerebral diffusion with normal aging. AJNR Am J 
Neuroradiol. 2001;22(1):136–42.

58. Moseley M. Diffusion tensor imaging and aging - a review. NMR Biomed. 2002;15(7-8):553–60.

59. Le Bihan D, Poupon C, Amadon A, Lethimonnier F. Artifacts and pitfalls in diffusion MRI. J Magn Reson Imaging. 2006;24(3):478–88.

60. Mukherjee P, Chung SW, Berman JI, Hess CP, Henry RG. Diffusion tensor MR imaging and fiber tractography: technical considerations. 
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2008;29(5):843–52.

61. Bammer R. Basic principles of diffusion-weighted imaging. Eur J Radiol. 2003;45(3):169–84.

62. Mukherjee P, Berman JI, Chung SW, Hess CP, Henry RG. Diffusion tensor MR imaging and fiber tractography: theoretic underpinnings. 
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2008;29(4):632–41.



