Physical Principles of Dynamic Contrast-Enhanced and Dynamic Susceptibility Contrast MRI

Introduction

The use of dynamic contrast-agent-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can provide insight into hemodynamic processes not 
detectable using conventional contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance (MR) techniques. This additional data may allow refinement of 
differential diagnoses based on microvascular physiology. The dominant dynamic gadolinium-based contrast agent (GBCA) injection MRI 
techniques currently utilized in brain imaging are: (1) T1-weighted dynamic contrastenhanced (DCE) MRI, and (2) T2/T2*-weighted dynamic 
susceptibility contrast (DSC) MRI. Of these, DSC-MRI is much more commonly used for clinical perfusion imaging of the brain, especially 
for the evaluation of stroke and tumor. On the other hand, DCE-MRI is the dominant method of dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI outside of 
the brain [1]. In both DCEMRI and DSC-MRI, dynamic images are acquired before, during, and after the administration of an exogenous 
GBCA. As opposed to other techniques, such as contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT), contrast-enhanced MRI is distinctive because 
it detects the changes induced in the local relaxation times of water rather than detecting the GBCA itself, where the

passage of a GBCA through tissue decreases the intrinsic T1, T2, and T2* relaxation times [2]. This chapter will provide an overview of 
the general physical principles of these techniques. An overview of these two methods is provided in Table 2.1 [3].

T1-Weighted Dynamic Contrast-Enhanced MRI

When applied to the brain, DCE-MRI is primarily employed to characterize the functional integrity of the blood–brain barrier (BBB) via 
estimation of microvascular permeability to GBCAs. The evaluation of cancer is a major application of DCE-MRI where it has potential to 
provide prognostic, predictive, and physiological response imaging biomarkers. Conventional GBCAs used in clinical MRI are diffusible, 
low-molecular-weight extracellular agents (~500 to 1000 Da) that remain intravascular when the BBB is intact. Disruption of the BBB 
secondary to a variety of pathological processes results in the transfer of GBCA moieties across the capillary endothelium from the 
intravascular space into the extravascular–extracellular space (EES). Leakage of GBCAs into the EES results in T1-shortening and 
contrast enhancement on T1-weighted imaging.

DCE-MRI Acquisition

There has historically been quite a variation of DCE-MRI acquisition protocols in the literature. DCE-MRI acquisition parameters are 
generally intended to emphasize R1 contrast and minimize competing T2* effects by employing short echo times (TEs) and repetition times 
(TRs) [2]. DCE-MRI most often utilizes a fast T1-weighted spoiled gradientrecalled echo sequence with the temporal resolution contingent 
on the volume coverage, contrast-to-noise ratio (CNR), and spatial resolution for a particular organ system [4, 5]. The temporal 
resolution demands for DCE-MRI are generally less than that for DSC-MRI unless an arterial input function (AIF) is needed [2]. DCE-MRI 
scan durations are generally much longer than for DSC-MRI and to estimate microvascular permeability with DCE-MRI, the temporal 
resolution generally ranges between 5 and 20 s [6–8]. Like with DSC-MRI, consistent technique including the use of a power injector for 
bolus injection (2–4 cc/s) of GBCA followed by a 20–30 cc saline flush at the same rate into the right arm to decrease possible venous 
reflux should be performed if possible in all cases.

Recent initiatives such as those by the Radiological Society of North America’s (RSNA’s) Quantitative Imaging Biomarkers Alliance (QIBA) 
have focused on standardizing acquisition and analysis of various imaging methods including DCEMRI. QIBA recommendations for DCE-MRI 
acquisition are included in Table 2.2 [5]. (Please see section “Standardization Efforts and Variability of DCE-MRI” below). In addition 
to conventional DCE-MRI acquisition methods, there have been several recent advances in pulse sequence acceleration methods to obtain 
high temporal and/or spatial resolution in DCEMRI. These include dynamic compressed sensing combined

with parallel imaging (GRAPPA) along with two-dimensional (2D) or three-dimensional (3D) + simultaneous multislice imaging (SMS) 
encoding [9], radial k-space encoding with golden angle ordering (GRASP) method [10], high under-sampling factors, [11] and 
time-resolved MR angiography methods with keyhole view-sharing [12].

DCE-MRI Data Analysis

In DCE-MRI, the concentration of GBCA must be determined in order to perform pharmacokinetic (PK) modeling. This is accomplished by 
measuring changes in T1-weighted signal intensity and assuming that these changes are proportional to GBCA concentration. This is a 
commonly used assumption given its simplicity; however, at high tracer concentrations, the relationship between signal intensity and 
GBCA concentration is non-linear and this can result in systematic error of DCE-MRI parameters.

Some studies have utilized predetermined T1 values, usually from the literature. However, this too can result in bias for several 
reasons: these are often performed in healthy subjects and there is then no consideration of the effects of aging or pathological 
conditions nor does it consider individual variability or tissue heterogeneity [1, 13–18]. Therefore, direct measurement of T1 in a 
given individual is more desirable because of potential T1 variability, particularly from pathological states. The gold standard method 
of

T1 mapping uses inversion recovery (IR) sequences; however, their long acquisition times preclude routine use [19]. The most commonly 
employed form of clinical T1 mapping is the variable flip angle (VFA) method using flip angles (FAs) of 2–30° with a gradient echo 
sequence (Table 2.2) [5]. The accuracy of T1 mapping relies on FA accuracy, which can be compromised due to several factors including 
the presence of standing waves from dielectric resonance in a subject [20], less uniform FA from smaller transmit coils, and poor slice 
profiles from 2D multi-slice imaging [21]. B1 mapping can be particularly helpful to correct FA inaccuracies, particularly at 3T and 
over large anatomic coverage [5, 22]. In addition to the IR and VFA methods, the LookLocker (LL) method is another technique for T1 
mapping. Like the VFA method, LL methods are faster than IR; however, they may also result in errors with studies suggesting that VFA 
may result in overestimation while LL may underestimate T1 values due to inaccurate B1 mapping and incomplete spoiling [19].

The determination of the arterial input function (AIF) to obtain more accurate measurement of the concentration of GBCA in blood plasma 
(Cp (t)) can be another source of error in DCE-MRI. Partial-volume average artifacts due to limitations in spatial resolution can result 
from the sampling of a small cerebral artery. Sampling from a large vein such as the superior sagittal sinus as a venous outflow 
function (VOF) can be used to correct partial-volume average artifacts by rescaling the area under the AIF curve [23–25]. The use of 
three-dimensional (3D) image acquisition, ensuring that the artery of interest is well visualized in the excitation slab, or using 
non-selective saturation pre-pulse can help alleviate inflow artifacts where the arterial blood appears bright on pre-contrast images 
[26]. If measurement of an individual AIF is not practical, other alternatives that have been used include population-based AIFs that do 
not incorporate individual differences. There are also reference tissue models that attempt to estimate the vascular tracer 
concentration from one or more normal-appearing surrounding tissues [27]. Hematocrit values should theoretically be incorporated into 
the AIF measurement because the GBCA remains in the blood plasma component and does not pass into red blood cells. However, in practice, 
a standard, rather than a directly measured, hematocrit value is used and this too can result in errors [4].

There are a variety of methods to analyze DCE-MRI data. At its most basic, non-PK modeling methods use subjective assessment of the 
signal intensity-time curve. These are simple to perform and interpret, yet will not provide in-depth understanding of the underlying 
pathophysiology [28]. Other methods involve semi-quantitative analysis of data with metrics such as the initial area under the 
enhancement curve (IAUC) and other methods of signal intensity-time curve analysis that provide more detailed characterization of the

kinetics of GBCA tissue accumulation [28, 29]. While easier to perform than PK modeling of DCE-MRI data, these semiquantitative methods 
cannot distinguish between physiologic factors and physical properties of image acquisition including, but not limited to, scanner 
parameters, method of GBCA administration, and native T1 of the interrogated tissue [30–32].

DCE Pharmacokinetic Modeling

Through more sophisticated PK modeling of DCE-MRI data, various quantitative parameters can be determined: the volume transfer constant 
between blood plasma and the EES (Ktrans ), the volume of EES per unit volume of tissue (ve ), the rate constant between EES and blood 
plasma (kep , where kep  = Ktrans /ve ), capillary wall permeability surface area product per unit volume of tissue (PSρ), and capillary 
blood flow (perfusion) per unit volume of tissue (Fρ) [6]. Most DCEMRI tracer kinetic models divide the tissue of interest into several 
compartments (Fig. 2.1). These include the blood plasma volume per unit volume of tissue (vp ) and the volume of 
extravascular–extracellular space per unit volume of tissue (ve ).

Of the various PK models that have been used to analyze DCE-MRI data, the most popular model is commonly referred to as the Tofts model 
[6, 33] and provides measures of K trans and ve . K trans was originally described by the following equation:

dC e ( t ) v e = K trans ( C p ( t ) − C e ( t ) ) dt

where C p and C e are the blood plasma and EES contrast agent concentrations, respectively (Fig. 2.1). K trans is the most frequently 
utilized metric in DCE-MRI and describes the rate of contrast agent flux into the EES. Its physiological meaning

Fig. 2.1 Schematic of two-compartment model in DCE-MRI. Keys: vp  = blood plasma volume per unit volume of tissue; v e = volume of 
extravascular extracellular space per unit volume of tissue; K trans = volume transfer constant between blood plasma and EES; C p = 
tracer concentration in arterial blood plasma; C e = tracer concentration in EES; and blue circles = intracellular space where contrast 
agent is excluded

can be complex as it is dependent on vascular permeability, capillary surface area, and the type of contrast agent utilized [34]. When 
there is very high permeability of the endothelium with respect to blood flow, (F << PS), K trans primarily reflects blood flow—(K trans 
= F(1 − Hct)—as this is the main limiting factor of the contrast agent flux; in this case, DCEMRI could be seen as “perfusion imaging.” 
When there is very low permeability as compared to blood flow (F >> PS), K trans mainly reflects permeability (K trans = PS), and in 
these situations DCE-MRI could be referred to as “permeability imaging” [6, 34, 35].

In the original Tofts model, neglecting the contribution of intravascular tracer to the MRI signal may be appropriate for a diffusible 
tracer where its distribution volume is large relative to blood volume. However, with an extracellular tracer, this may be problematic 
as its distribution volume is smaller [6, 36]. This assumption may produce erroneous K trans estimates because intravascular tracer 
could contribute a significant proportion of the observed tissue signal. Therefore, in the presence of an intravascular–extracellular 
tracer, the model has been modified and expressed as:

C t ( t ) = v p C p ( t ) + K trans ∫ C p ( τ ) e − K trans ( ) dτ 0

where v p represents the blood plasma volume per unit volume of tissue. This model is often referred to as the “extended Tofts model” 
[6] (Fig. 2.1). v p may be ignored in situations when the plasma volume or tracer concentration is negligible; e.g., hypovascular 
low-enhancing tissues or a few minutes after the bolus. However, in diseases that are highly perfused, such as neoplasms, there should 
be consideration of v p [4] (Fig. 2.2).

There are less commonly utilized PK models besides the Tofts and extended Tofts models. While the Tofts models assume a bi-directional 
exchange of CA between the vascular space and EES, a simpler assumption of a unidirectional transport of CA from the vascular to the EES 
compartment can be formulated. The “Patlak model” [37] utilizes this form and can be expressed as:

t C t ( t ) = v p C p ( t ) + K trans ∫ C p ( τ ) dτ

The two-compartment exchange model (2XCM) is a more generalized kinetic model than the Tofts and Patlak models. It can be used in mixed 
perfusion and permeability conditions that can allow estimation of PS and F to be calculated [1, 38, 39]. This takes the form of:

v p = F ( C a − C p ) − K PS ( C p − C e ) and v e = K PS ( C p − C e ) dt dt

Standardization Efforts and Variability of DCE-MRI

Lately, there has been increasing awareness regarding the need to decrease bias and variability of quantitative imaging biomarkers. 
Efforts such as the RSNA’s QIBA have focused on various imaging methods including DCE-MRI [42]. The QIBA Perfusion Biomarker Committee 
Task Force has been continuously working on their DCE-MRI profile [43]. The goal of QIBA profiles such as the one on DCE-MRI is to 
assist in achieving adequate performance for an imaging biomarker and to provide details about the capabilities and limitations of an 
imaging marker. It does so by offering guidance regarding imaging acquisition, devices, technologists, radiologists, subject handling, 
image quality assurance, reconstruction software, imaging analysis tools, and image quality assurance.

Standardization of image acquisition parameters is a major point of emphasis for QIBA. Inter-scanner and intersite variability of T1 
values in the brain is well known where the Look-Locker IR method can underestimate while the VFA technique can overestimate white 
matter T1 measurements [19]. Factors such as the particular MR sequence employed, B 1 field inhomogeneity, temperature of the magnet 
bore, and incomplete spoiling of transverse magnetization can influence the derived T1 values [44]. Before the acquisition of clinical 
DCE-MRI data, it is important to determine the true scanner variance and bias for T1 values through the use of a T1 phantom. The QIBA 
DCE-MRI T1 phantom is composed of spheres containing solutions of varying concentrations of nickel chloride [44]. The phantom contains 
two sets of spheres: one set to simulate the vascular input function and the other set to represent tissue (Fig. 2.3). The T1 values for 
the vascular input spheres range between

0.75 and 41.6 s − 1 while the tissue spheres range between

0.67 and 7.5 s− 1 . The phantom is filled with 30-mM sodium chloride solution to simulate patient coil loading. To obtain T1 values, an 
acquisition protocol that encompasses the typical VFAs is used for T1 mapping. This employs a coronal fast spoiled gradient echo 
sequence with VFAs of 2, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, and 30°. The use of the QIBA DCE phantom to determine test–retest reliability and T1 
accuracy is par-

ticularly important in longitudinal DCE-MRI studies. In order to analyze image data from the QIBA DCE-MRI phantom, QIBA also provides 
automated T1 quantification software [45].

A recent multicenter phantom study of vendor-provided B1 mapping sequences demonstrated the potential for these techniques to provide 
unbiased and reproducible quantification of B1 field inhomogeneity that could be used to account for spatial variation in the 
transmitted radio frequency (RF) field [46]. Version 2.0 of the RSNA QIBA DCE-MRI Profile is currently being written and it will address 
spatially dependent B1 field inhomogeneity effects that may affect VFA T1 measurements. This is particularly problematic at higher 
fields like 3T and when data are acquired over large anatomic regions and may necessitate B1 mapping and corrections to be incorporated 
in the measurement of T1 values [5].

While the QIBA T1 phantom is a static phantom, there has been recent work by Kim et al. [47] on a dynamic perfusion phantom focused on 
DCE-MRI of the abdomen. They used two different 3T MRI scanners and three healthy volunteers. When compared to a static phantom, they 
found that the perfusion phantom significantly decreased the variability of contrast concentration and K trans measurements measured in 
four abdominal organs (liver, spleen, pancreas, and paravertebral muscles). One should note that while estimates of DCE-MRI performance 
can be conducted with phantoms, these experiments likely underestimate the variability produced in clinical populations due to the 
absence of motion artifacts [5].

Few clinical DCE-MRI studies of variability have been done in the brain and more data are desperately needed. However, practical 
difficulties centering on the need to do multiple GBCA injections in patients make such studies difficult to conduct. One such study was 
performed in 2003 by Jackson et al. [48] in 9 glioma patients and found that the within-region of interest (ROI) coefficient of 
variation for mean K trans was 7.7% with a repeatability coefficient of 21.3%. A more recent publication by Barboriak et al. in 2019 
[49] found that in a multicenter imaging study of recurrent glioblastoma, less variation in inter-reader tumor segmentation volumes, 
possibly through the use of automated tools, may decrease variability in DCE-MRI metrics like Ktrans .

T2/T2*-Weighted Dynamic Susceptibility Contrast MRI

Dynamic susceptibility contrast (DSC)-MRI has been applied to many neurological diseases, most prominently brain tumors and stroke. 
Compared to DCE-MRI, DSC-MRI is much more commonly used in the clinical setting for brain imaging, though the opposite is true outside 
of the brain.

Also sometimes referred to as bolus tracking MRI, a nondiffusible tracer, typically a GBCA, is administered and rapid images are 
obtained during the first-pass of the contrast agent. Several parameters are derived from DSC-MRI including relative cerebral blood flow 
(CBF), mean transit time (MTT), and relative cerebral blood volume (rCBV). rCBV is generally considered the most widely utilized and 
robust DSC-MRI perfusion metric in brain imaging.

DSC-MRI Acquisition

Like DCE-MRI, DSC-MRI acquisition consists of images acquired before, during, and after administration of an intravascular contrast 
administration (CA). While DCE-MRI emphasizes T1 contrast and uses short TE and TR to minimize competing T2* effects, DSC-MRI emphasizes 
T2* and T2 contrast. Accordingly, long TE and TR are used to minimize competing T1 effects [2]. In gradient echo-echo planar imaging 
(GRE-EPI DSC-MRI), TE is usually in the range of 25–35 ms in order to optimize T2* weighting, signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), and 
sensitivity to T1 effects [2, 50, 51]. With regard to TR, 1.5 s or less is recommended to optimize temporal resolution given the 
constraints of desired slices, TE and T1 weighting [2, 50, 51]. Regardless of whether GRE or spin echo (SE) sequences are used, DSC-MRI 
requires very robust temporal resolution (<2 s/time point) with adequate spatial resolution. Given the need for high temporal 
resolution, single-shot EPI sequences are typically used. Some newer methods designed to address the image distortion and signal dropout 
artifacts that degrade traditional EPI acquisitions include single-line acquisitions [27], spiral or radial acquisitions [52, 53], and 
advanced EPI readouts [54, 55].

A flip angle of 60–70° may in principle provide a compromise between SNR and T1 sensitivity from GBCA leakage effects [2, 50, 51]. 
Higher flip angles would result in greater SNR, but would be more susceptible to GBCA leakage effects due to increased T1 sensitivity. 
On the other hand, lower flip angles are less prone to GBCA leakage effects but at the cost of lower SNR. In order to avoid 
partial-volume average artifacts, adequate spatial resolution of 1–3 mm in plane and 3–5 mm through plane are recommended, though this 
may depend on desired temporal resolution [2].

Most DSC-MRI data are acquired using GRE-EPI sequences, although some have used SE-EPI. SE methods are most sensitive to smaller vessels 
(<20 μ[mu]m; i.e., capillaries) [56], and also are less prone to artifacts at bonebrain–air interfaces or at the skull base compared to 
GRE methods [57, 58]. GRE-EPI methods result in greater signal loss [2], and are sensitive to vessels of all sizes [56] with excellent 
signal-to-noise ratios. GRE methods also allow higher temporal resolution due to shorter TEs and this improves AIF quantification [2]. 
Given its sensitivity to vessels of all sizes, perfusion metrics derived from GRE could suffer from large vessel blooming artifact 
because of a tendency of the signal from capillaries to be dominated by macrovascular signal [59, 60]. Thus, GRE-based acquisition could 
provide overestimates of perfusion metrics, while SE techniques likely provide truer estimates of capillary-level perfusion compared to 
positron emission tomography (PET).

Newer multi-echo DSC-MRI acquisitions such as spin and gradient echo (SAGE) [61–65] allow simultaneous

acquisition of GRE and SE data without adding additional scan time or GBCA injections. These methods may provide important additional 
complementary information given their different sensitivities to vessel size, and enable vessel size imaging (VSI) to be performed and 
also provide simultaneous DCE-MRI metrics with only a single dose of contrast agent. Other techniques such as spiral perfusion imaging 
with consecutive echoes (SPICE) methods [53] can also provide both DSC-MRI and DCE-MRI metrics in a single acquisition and without the 
need of a preload dose of GBCA.

The scan duration of DSC-MRI is much shorter than DCE-MRI and is shortest for indications like brain tumor evaluation (at least 2 min 
recommended). For other indications where there will be bolus dispersion and delay, like stroke evaluation, longer scan duration is 
needed [66]. DSCMRI acquisitions are limited by compromises in spatiotemporal resolution, volume coverage, and SNR. Recent advances to 
accelerate DSC-MRI acquisition and achieve optimal spatiotemporal resolution include the use of parallel imaging methods [55, 67] to 
decrease the EPI readouts, reduce EPI-related artifacts, and decrease partial-volume effects. Other methods such as simultaneous 
multi-slice acquisitions [68] can accelerate DSC-MRI acquisitions by applying simultaneously exciting multiple slice planes with 
radiofrequency pulses without significant loss of SNR while achieving high spatiotemporal resolution.

Compared to DCE-MRI, GBCA injection rates should be relatively higher (at least 4 cc/s) for DSC-MRI in order to avoid underestimation of 
DSC-MRI metrics from slower rates [69]. Similar to DCE-MRI, injection should ideally be given via the right arm in order to avoid venous 
reflux. Approximately 60 s of baseline data should be acquired prior to the injection of a GBCA in order to provide good CBV map CNR 
[51]. An overview of DSC-MRI recommended acquisition parameters is given in Table 2.3 [51, 70, 71].

DSC-MRI Data Analysis

Based on the indicator dilution methods for non-diffusible tracers, CBV is proportional to the area under the contrast agent 
concentration (Δ[Delta]R2 * [or Δ{Delta}R2 ])-time curve, assuming that there is no contrast agent leakage or recirculation [72]. While 
in DCE-MRI, dipole–dipole interactions are primarily responsible for GBCA-based T1 relaxation enhancement, the main contrast mechanism 
in DSC-MRI is susceptibility effects induced by GBCAs [73]. When a GBCA is given as a bolus, a transient drop in signal intensity is 
seen on the signal intensity-time curve, known as “negative enhancement,” as opposed to the “positive enhancement” due to enhanced T1 
relaxation in DCE-MRI or conventional contrast-enhanced T1-weighted imaging.

Like in DCE-MRI, changes in DSC-MRI signal intensity are converted to the tissue concentration of GBCA at time t (C(t)). For DSC-MRI, 
this relation is noted on a voxel-wise basis as:

C ( t ) ∝ k ⋅ ∆R 2 ∗ ( t ) = −

k

 S ( t ) 

 

where k represents a proportionality constant (often set to unity as it is not known a priori) that is dependent on tissue type, field 
strength, contrast agent, and pulse sequence; ΔR2 ∗ (t) represents the change in the T2* relaxation rate at time t; TE is the echo 
time; S(t) represents the signal intensity at time t; and S 0 represents the baseline signal intensity before arrival of the GBCA. It is 
assumed that T1 effects due to an intact BBB are not significant during DSC-MRI acquisition and that there is a linear relationship 
between ΔR2 ∗ (t) and C(t) [74]. However, in lesions such as brain tumors, disruption of the BBB is common and necessitates changes in 
acquisition and post-processing methods in order to compensate for GBCA leakage effects (discussed below). Furthermore, the assumed 
linear relationship

between ΔR2 ∗ (t) and C(t) may not hold true [75] and assumption of a quadratic relationship could be assumed to mitigate CBF errors, 
particularly when estimating the AIF [76].

The area beneath the concentration-time curve is calculated to derive the CBV map. By applying tracer kinetic modeling for intravascular 
tracer agents [77–80], CBV can be obtained by integrating C(t) using the following relationship:

H f ∫ t 0 C t ( t ) dt CBV = ρ ∫ t 0 C a ( t ) dt

where H f represents the difference in hematocrit between the AIF and capillaries, Ct (t) represents the concentration of GBCA in the 
tissues, ρ represents the brain tissue density, and Ca (t) represents the AIF. The AIF can be ignored because of constraints in 
quantification due to limited temporal and spatial resolution and so “relative” CBV is commonly reported.

Indicator dilution theory can be used to model Ct (t) using the following equation:

t C t ( t ) = CBF ⋅ C a ( t ) ⊗ R ( t ) = CBF ⋅ ∫ C a ( t ) R ( t − τ ) dτ 0

where ⊗ represents convolution of Ca (t) and the tissue residue function R(t), which represents the amount of contrast agent that 
remains in the tissue at time t.

The deconvolution of the Ca (t) and Ct (t) is needed to quantify CBF. Of the various methods available, the most commonly used 
model-independent method is singular value decomposition (SVD) [81] that is expressed as:

t

j

C t ( t ) = CBF ⋅ ∫ C a ( t ) R ( t − τ ) dτ ≈ ∆t

C a ( t i ) R ( t j − ti 

∑

i =0

)

where it is assumed that R(t) and Ca (t) remain constant over small time intervals and that cerebral and arterial concentrations are 
measured at equally spaced time points. In order for SVD to determine R(t), methods have been devised to decrease errors from the 
potential delay between the AIF and tissue concentration curves [82] and to avoid physiologically unreasonable results due to noise that 
lead to unstable solutions. The most common ways to address these two issues are to implement a block-circulant AIF discretization 
matrix with a truncated SVD regularization approach, respectively [2].

Application of the central volume theorem allows calculation of the mean transit time (MTT):

MTT =

CBV

CBF

Aside from CBV, CBF, and MTT, there are several other emerging DSC-MRI parameters on the horizon. Newer kinetic models can provide 
estimates of oxygen extraction fraction (OEF) and capillary transit time heterogeneity (CTH) that may better relate to the oxygen 
delivery that could be attained for a given CBF [83]. Traditional determination of oxygen availability in the brain is determined using 
CBF and arterial oxygen concentration, but these newer methods have the potential to highlight perfusion derangements in brain tissue 
that may not be detected with conventional DSC-MRI analysis. As was mentioned previously, the use of gradient-echo and spin-echo 
sequences to provide simultaneous estimations of Δ(Delta)R 2 and Δ(Delta)R2 * can provide other parameters including measures of vessel 
size imaging (VSI), microvascular density, mean vessel diameter [84], and vessel architectural imaging (VAI) (Fig. 2.4) [85]. In current 
practice, these measures are obtained with tissue sampling and defined by the pathologist. However, validation of these techniques could 
overcome the limitations of sampling error and inability to perform longitudinal analysis, and may become important with the continued 
development of anti-vascular and anti-angiogenic therapies [86].

Arterial Input Function

Determination of the AIF is one of the leading sources of error in the quantification of DSC-MRI. Various manual and automatic 
approaches [87–94] have been proposed to measure the AIF, but the most commonly used approach is to use a global, as opposed to local, 
measurement using voxels either in or adjacent to the middle cerebral artery (MCA). While straightforward to do, assuming a global AIF 
will not likely be the true arterial input to the region of interest and may introduce errors in quantification due to AIF delay and 
dispersion [66, 95]. Delay effects can be compensated for by using AIF discretization techniques that are resistant to delay in SVD for 
example, while dispersion effects are difficult to adjust for when using a global AIF [2]. In stroke cases, multiple regional AIFs may 
diminish some of the dispersion errors [96] from vascular disease and using these along with newer models based on vascular morphology 
and fluid dynamics [97, 98] holds promise to combat dispersion effects.

Absolute Quantification

Absolute quantification of DSC-MRI is difficult due to several factors such as uncertainties relating to hematocrit, brain proton 
density constants, contrast agent relaxivity, contrast

agent leakage correction, and AIF considerations [2, 50, 51]. As a result, most DSC-MRI studies rely on qualitative or semi-quantitative 
measures. Most often, a summary statistic in the form of “relative” CBV (rCBV) or CBF (rCBF) is often used without definition of the AIF 
[50]. It should be noted that in addition to “relative” CBV (or CBF), “rCBV” can also refer to “regional” CBV [99]. It is also common 
for relative CBV to refer to a value that is normalized to “normal” tissue, typically contralateral white matter [100], while “regional” 
CBV often refers to absolute quantification of CBV.

Scaling metrics such as normalization or standardization are commonly applied to non-quantitative rCBV values in order to compare 
between subjects and imaging sessions. However, the amount of variability intrinsic to these techniques is unclear [101]. With 
normalization, the mean value of the voxels within a tumoral ROI is divided by those in a reference ROI, usually that in 
normal-appearing white matter. Normalization is quite commonly used; however, it can be time consuming and lead to user-dependent 
subjectivity [102]. On the other hand, when standardization is used, there is no need to use a reference ROI because rCBV maps are 
transformed to a standardized intensity scale. In this way, it can function as an objective technique of converting rCBV values to a 
consistent scale and it appears to improve rCBV measurement consistency across patients and time [102].

Leakage Effects of GBCAs

GBCA leakage can diminish the accuracy and precision of rCBV derived from DSC-MRI. With an intact BBB, compartmentalization of GBCA 
within the vasculature mainly impacts T2 or T2* with minimal impact on T1, and diminutive Δ(Delta)R 1 is a major assumption in DSC-MRI 
[56]. In theory, the equation for Δ(Delta)R2 * is valid only if the changes in T1 associated with GBCA leakage do not significantly 
affect signal intensity. However, this assumption often does not hold true as a disrupted blood–brain barrier leading to 
contrast-enhancement is commonly seen in clinical practice, particularly with many brain tumors. In cases of contrast agent leakage, 
underestimation of rCBV may occur because GBCA leakage can diminish the magnitude of the susceptibility contrast signal intensity loss 
in regions where T1 effects are prominent (Fig. 2.5). At the same time, it is possible to overestimate rCBV in the face of prominent 
T2/T2* effects because this will result in greater signal decrease and undershooting of the baseline signal intensity. The amount of 
under- or overestimation of rCBV is contingent upon contrast agent kinetics, brain tissue microstructure, pulse sequence parameters, and 
preload GBCA dose [2].

The decreased susceptibility differences between the intra- and extravascular compartments due to GBCA leakage result in temporally 
variant decreases in GBCA T2* relaxivity [25, 103]. More T2* signal decrease can result from mesoscopic magnetic field gradients induced 
by compartmentalization of GBCA around cells (Fig. 2.6). These changes may be influenced by cellular features such as shape, size, 
density, polydispersity, and atypia [104]. The potential interaction between T1 and T2/T2* effects in the same lesion further 
complicates interpretation of rCBV values [105].

There has historically been various methodologies employed to address leakage effects including low flip angle and dual TE acquisitions, 
preload GBCA dosing, and mathematical post-processing models [105–108]. Current recommendations (see section “Standardization Efforts 
and Variability of DSC-MRI” below) to correct for leakage effects in single-echo GRE-EPI sequences are to use 60° FA acquisition with 
full-dose preload or 30° FA without preload, both with full-dose bolus GBCA administration and application of the 
Boxerman-Schmainda-Weisskoff (BSW) modelbased leakage correction method [51, 70, 109–111]. The BSW model generates rCBV corrected for T1 
and T2* leakage effects by using linear fitting to calculate voxel-wise differences in ΔR 2 ∗ curves from non-enhancing regions and 
assumes unidirectional GBCA extravasation [105, 112]. Recent work in a rat glioma model suggests that dual-echo DSC-MRI acquisitions 
along with a combined biophysical and pharmacokinetic method can potentially eliminate the need for preload GBCA dosing [113].

Superparamagnetic contrast agents such as iron oxide nanoparticles are a newer type of contrast agent that may be advantageous compared 
to GBCAs given their lack of extravasation, more prominent T2 and T2* relaxivity, and recent concerns about potential long-term effects 
of gadolinium tissue deposition [114]. Though there are no current such blood pool agents approved for DSC-MRI, ferumoxytol can be used 
off-label for DSC-MRI [115]. Ferumoxytol is a macromolecular, carbohydrate-coated iron oxide particle that has been sold under the name 
Feraheme as an iron replacement for adult renal failure patients [116, 117], and several studies have shown promise of DSC-MRI using 
this agent to distinguish pseudoprogression from tumor progression in brain tumor patients [118, 119].

Standardization Efforts and Variability of DSC-MRI

As with DCE-MRI, there has been a lack of standardized methodology for DSC-MRI [120]. Significant variation in rCBV values can result 
from differences in image acquisition and post-processing methods, particularly with regard to dealing with leakage effects [121]. This 
lack of standardization has made inclusion of DSC-MRI into clinical trials and routine practice rather difficult, and to help address 
this, the American Society of Functional Neuroradiology (ASFNR) published its recommended DSC-MRI protocol in 2015 centered around 
1/4–full-dose preload GBCA administration, an intermediate (60°) flip angle, field strength-dependent TE,

and model-based leakage correction (Table 2.3). The Brain Tumor Imaging Protocol (BTIP) consensus recommendations [122], also published 
in 2015, stipulate that conventional contrast-enhanced T1-weighted imaging be acquired following single-dose GBCA administration, 
thereby impacting the design of a protocol that incorporates DSCMRI. To maintain BTIP compatibility, either single-dose GBCA must be 
split between preload and DSC-MRI bolus before conventional post-contrast imaging, or a full-dose preload must precede post-contrast 
imaging, followed by variable-dose DSC-MRI bolus. In 2018, Schmainda et al. [123] performed a multicenter DSC-MRI study composed of 
low-grade and high-grade gliomas. These scans were obtained with a GRE-EPI sequence with preload at a single institution and then seven 
sites used a variety of model-based post-processing leakage correction, including no correction at all, to compute DSC-MRI metrics. 
These multicenter results confirmed other prior studies showing the advantages of using preload and model-based leakage correction to 
obtain consistent results across institutions and distinguish low- from high-grade tumors using a common threshold [65, 106, 107, 112, 
121].

Recent work by Semmineh et al. [70] found that by using a population-based digital reference object (DRO) simulating a glioblastoma and 
the ASFNR recommendations of TE = 30 ms and 60° FA at 1.5 T and 3 T resulted in outstanding precision and accuracy for single-dose 
preload and single-

dose DSC bolus (“1+1” dosing scheme). However, notably worse results were found using fractional GBCA doses, particularly those without 
preload dosing and at 1.5 T. They also found that a protocol using no-preload dose, a low (30°) FA, and TE = 30 ms at 3 T performed 
essentially as well as the 1+1 dosing scheme, and in 2019, Schmainda et al. published clinical validation of those DRO results in a 
four-institution study (Fig. 2.7) [71]. This low-FA, no-preload methodology could be a preferred standardized DSC-MRI methodology 
because it is a simpler technique with fewer injections and less volume of GBCA. Further multicenter validation, particularly at 1.5 T, 
is needed.

Again, as with DCE-MRI, there is little data regarding the repeatability of DSC-MRI. Recently, Prah et al. compared repeatability of six 
common post-processing methods to estimate normalized rCBV (nrCBV) and standardized rCBV (srCBV) [101]. They performed double-baseline 
examinations in 33 patients with newly diagnosed untreated glioblastoma. Repeat MRI examinations were obtained within eight days. Those 
methods that used post-processing leakage correction of ∆(Delta)R2 *(t) resulted in superior repeatability and compared to nrCBV, srCBV 
had less variability and needed fewer participants to detect a 10% or 20% change (Fig. 2.8).

To address the lack of standardization of DSC-MRI, QIBA has recently initiated the DSC-MRI Biomarker Committee whose goal is to 
standardize DSC-MRI methods [124].

Conclusion

In summary, both DCE-MRI and DSC-MRI approaches offer overlapping and complementary insights into the microvasculature and hemodynamics 
of the brain in health and disease. While both have existed for several decades, routine, standardized clinical implementation remains 
elusive. A recent 2017 systematic review and meta-analysis by Patel et al. [120] found that while individual studies of DCE-

MRI and DSC-MRI appear to have good accuracy for differentiating viable glioma from post-treatment changes, the reported thresholds have 
significant variability. This highlights the great promise of these techniques beyond conventional MRI for important clinical 
applications, but emphasizes the need to standardize technique and demonstrate acceptable variability of these methods. A table of key 
literature of DCE-MRI and DSC-MRI covered in this chapter is listed in Table 2.4.

References

18. Kim KA, Park M-S, Kim I-S, Kiefer B, Chung W-S, Kim M-J, et al. Quantitative evaluation of liver cirrhosis using T1 relaxation time 
with 3 tesla MRI before and after oxygen inhalation. J Magn Reson Imaging. 2012;36(2):405–10.

1. Sourbron SP, Buckley DL. Classic models for dynamic contrastenhanced MRI. NMR Biomed. 2013;26(8):1004–27.

2. Quarles CC, Bell LC, Stokes AM. Imaging vascular and hemodynamic features of the brain using dynamic susceptibility contrast and 
dynamic contrast enhanced MRI. NeuroImage. 2019;187:32–55.

3. Jahng G-H, Li K-L, Ostergaard L, Calamante F. Perfusion magnetic resonance imaging: a comprehensive update on principles and 
techniques. Korean J Radiol. 2014;15(5):554–77.

4. Georgiou L, Buckley DL. T1-weighted DCE MRI. In: Cercignani M, Dowell NG, Tofts P, editors. Quantitative MRI of the brain: principles 
of physical measurement. 2nd ed. Boca Raton: CRC Press; 2018. p. 251–68.

5. Shukla-Dave A, Obuchowski NA, Chenevert TL, Jambawalikar S, Schwartz LH, Malyarenko D, et al. Quantitative imaging biomarkers 
alliance (QIBA) recommendations for improved precision of DWI and DCE-MRI derived biomarkers in multicenter oncology trials. J Magn 
Reson Imaging. 2018;49(7):101–21.

6. Tofts PS, Brix G, Buckley DL, Evelhoch JL, Henderson E, Knopp MV, et al. Estimating kinetic parameters from dynamic contrast-enhanced 
t1-weighted MRI of a diffusable tracer: standardized quantities and symbols. J Magn Reson Imaging. 1999;10(3):223–32.

7. O’Connor JP, Aboagye EO, Adams JE, et al. Imaging biomarker road-map for cancer studies. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2017;14(3):169–86.

8. Tofts PS. Modeling tracer kinetics in dynamic Gd-DTPA MR imaging. J Magn Reson Imaging. 1997;7(1):91–101.

9. Yoon H, Park S-H, Ye JC. Improved volumetric imaging for DCEMRI using parallel imaging and dynamic compressed sensing. IEEE Glob 
Conf. 2014;2014:483–6.

10. Espagnet MR, Bangiyev L, Haber M, Block K, Babb J, Ruggiero V, et al. High-resolution DCE-MRI of the pituitary gland using radial 
k-space acquisition with compressed sensing reconstruction. Am J Neuroradiol. 2015;36(8):1444–9.

11. Guo Y, Lebel RM, Zhu Y, Lingala SG, Shiroishi MS, Law M, et al. High-resolution whole-brain DCE-MRI using constrained 
reconstruction: prospective clinical evaluation in brain tumor patients. Med Phys. 2016;43(5):2013–23.

12. Zhao J, Yang Z-Y, Luo B-N, Yang J-Y, Chu J-P. Quantitative evaluation of diffusion and dynamic contrast-enhanced MR in tumor 
parenchyma and peritumoral area for distinction of brain tumors. PLoS One. 2015;10(9):e0138573.

13. Abe T, Mizobuchi Y, Nakajima K, Otomi Y, Irahara S, Obama Y, et al. Diagnosis of brain tumors using dynamic contrast-enhanced 
perfusion imaging with a short acquisition time. Springerplus. 2015;4(1):88.

14. Haacke EM, Filleti CL, Gattu R, Ciulla C, Al-Bashir A, Suryanarayanan K, et al. New algorithm for quantifying vascular changes in 
dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI independent of absoluteT1 values. Magn Reson Med. 2007;58(3):463–72.

15. Tietze A, Mouridsen K, Mikkelsen IK. The impact of reliable prebolus T 1 measurements or a fixed T1 value in the assessment of 
glioma patients with dynamic contrast enhancing MRI. Neuroradiology. 2015;57(6):561–72.

16. Fennessy FM, Fedorov A, Gupta SN, Schmidt EJ, Tempany CM, Mulkern RV. Practical considerations in T1 mapping of prostate for dynamic 
contrast enhancement pharmacokinetic analyses. Magn Reson Imaging. 2012;30(9):1224–33.

17. Besa C, Bane O, Jajamovich G, Marchione J, Taouli B. 3D T1 relaxometry pre and post gadoxetic acid injection for the assessment of 
liver cirrhosis and liver function. Magn Reson Imaging. 2015;33(9):1075–82.

19. Stikov N, Boudreau M, Levesque IR, Tardif CL, Barral JK, Pike GB. On the accuracy of T1mapping: Searching for common ground. Magn 
Reson Med. 2015;73(3):514–22.

20. Barker GJ, Simmons A, Arridge SR, Tofts PS. A simple method for investigating the effects of non-uniformity of radiofrequency 
transmission and radiofrequency reception in MRI. Br J Radiol. 1998;71(841):59–67.

21. Parker GJ, Barker GJ, Tofts PS. Accurate multislice gradient echoT1 measurement in the presence of non-ideal RF pulse shape and RF 
field nonuniformity. Magn Reson Med. 2001;45(5):838–45.

22. Dowell NG, Tofts PS. Fast, accurate, and precise mapping of the RF field in vivo using the 180° signal null. Magn Reson Med. 
2007;58(3):622–30.

23. Larsson HBW, Courivaud F, Rostrup E, Hansen AE. Measurement of brain perfusion, blood volume, and blood-brain barrier permeability, 
using dynamic contrast-enhancedT1-weighted MRI at 3 tesla. Magn Reson Med. 2009;62(5):1270–81.

24. Hansen AE, Pedersen H, Rostrup E, Larsson HB. Partial volume effect (PVE) on the arterial input function (AIF) inT1-weighted 
perfusion imaging and limitations of the multiplicative rescaling approach. Magn Reson Med. 2009;62(4):1055–9.

25. Sourbron S, Ingrisch M, Siefert A, Resier M, Herrmann

K. Quantification of cerebral blood flow, cerebral blood volume, and blood-brain-barrier leakage with DCE-MRI. Magn Reson Med. 
2009;62(1):205–17.

26. Buckley DL, Roberts C, Parker GJM, Logue JP, Hutchinson CE. Prostate cancer: evaluation of vascular characteristics with dynamic 
contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR imaging—initial experience. Radiology. 2004;233(3):709–15.

27. Quarles CC, Gore JC, Xu L, Yankeelov TE. Comparison of dualecho DSC-MRI- and DCE-MRI-derived contrast agent kinetic parameters. Magn 
Reson Imaging. 2012;30(7):944–53.

28. Narang J, Jain R, Arbab AS, Mikkelsen T, Scarpace L, Rosenblum ML, et al. Differentiating treatment-induced necrosis from 
recurrent/progressive brain tumor using nonmodel-based semiquantitative indices derived from dynamic contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR 
perfusion. Neuro-Oncology. 2011;13(9):1037–46.

29. Parker GJM, Buckley DL. Tracer kinetic modeling for T1-weighted DCE-MRI. In: Jackson A, Buckley DL, Parker GJM, editors. Dynamic 
contrast-enhanced MRI in oncology. Berlin: Springer; 2005. p. 81–92.

30. Paldino MJ, Barboriak DP. Fundamentals of quantitative dynamic contrast-enhanced MR imaging. Magn Reson Imaging Clin N Am. 
2009;17(2):277–89.

31. Gribbestad IS, Gjesdal KI, Nilsen G, Lundgren S, Hjelstuen MHB, Jackson A. An introduction to dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI in 
oncology. In: Jackson A, Buckley DL, Parker GJM, editors. Dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging in oncology. Berlin: 
Springer; 2005. p. 81–92.

32. Padhani AR. Dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI in clinical oncology: current status and future directions. J Magn Reson Imaging. 
2002;16(4):407–22.

33. Tofts PS, Kermode AG. Measurement of the blood-brain barrier permeability and leakage space using dynamic MR imaging. 1. Fundamental 
concepts. Magn Reson Med. 1991;17(2):357–67.

34. Gerstner ER, Sorensen AG, Jain RK, Batchelor TT. Advances in neuroimaging techniques for the evaluation of tumor growth, vascular 
permeability, and angiogenesis in gliomas. Curr Opin Neurol. 2008;21(6):728–35.

35. Zaharchuk G. Theoretical basis of hemodynamic MR imaging techniques to measure cerebral blood volume, cerebral blood flow, and 
permeability. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2007;28(10):1850–8.

36. Brix G, Bahner ML, Hoffmann U, Horvath A, Schreiber

W. Regional blood flow, capillary permeability, and compartmental volumes: measurement with dynamic CT–initial experience. Radiology. 
1999;210(1):269–76.

37. Patlak CS, Blasberg RG, Fenstermacher JD. Graphical evaluation of blood-to-brain transfer constants from multiple-time uptake data. 
J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 1983;3(1):1–7.

38. Brix G, Kiessling F, Lucht R, Darai S, Wasser K, Delorme S, Griebel J. Microcirculation and microvasculature in breast tumors: 
pharmacokinetic analysis of dynamic MR image series. Magn Reson Med. 2004;52(2):420–9.

39. Sourbron SP, Buckley DL. Tracer kinetic modeling in MRI:

estimating perfusion and capillary permeability. Phys Med Biol. 2012;57(2):R1–R33.

40. Naish JH, Kershaw LE, Buckley DL, et al. Modeling of contrast agent kinetics in the lung using T1-weighted dynamic contrastenhanced 
MRI. Magn Reson Med. 2009;61(6):1507–14.

41. Brix G, Zwick S, Kiessling F, Griebel J. Pharmacokinetic analysis of tissue microcirculation using nested models: multimodel 
interference and parameter identifiability. Med Phys. 2009;36(7):2923–33.

42. Quantitative Imaging Biomarkers Alliance. Rsna.org.

2019. Available from: https://www.rsna.org/en/research/ quantitative-imaging-biomarkers-alliance.

43. Profiles. Profiles - QIBA Wiki. 2019. Available from https:// qibawiki.rsna.org/index.php/Profiles.

44. Bane O, Hectors SJ, Wagner M, Arlinghaus LL, Aryal MP, Cao Y, et al. Accuracy, repeatability, and interplatform reproducibility of 
T1 quantification methods used for DCE-MRI: Results from a multicenter phantom study. Magn Reson Med. 2018;79(5):2564–75.

45. Quantitative Imaging Data Warehouse (QIDW). 2019. Available from: https://www.rsna.org/en/ research/quantitative- imaging- 
biomarkers- alliance/ quantitative-imaging-data-warehouse.

46. Bliesener Y, Zhong X, Guo Y, Boss M, Bosca R, Laue H, et al. Radiofrequency transmit calibration: a multi-center evaluation of 
vendor-provided radiofrequency transmit mapping methods. Med Phys. 2019;46(6):2629–37.

47. Kim H, Mousa M, Schexnailder P, Hergenrother R, Bolding M, Ntsikoussalabongui B, et al. Portable perfusion phantom for quantitative 
DCE-MRI of the abdomen. Med Phys. 2017;44(10):5198–209.

48. Jackson A, Jayson GC, Li KL, Zhu XP, Checkley DR, Tessier JJL, et al. Reproducibility of quantitative dynamic contrastenhanced MRI 
in newly presenting glioma. Br J Radiol. 2003;76(903):153–62.

49. Barboriak DP, Zhang Z, Desai P, Snyder BS, Safriel Y, Mckinstry RC, et al. Interreader variability of dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI 
of recurrent glioblastoma: the multicenter ACRIN 6677/ RTOG 0625 study. Radiology. 2019;290(2):467–76.

50. Shiroishi MS, Castellazzi G, Boxerman JL, Damore F, Essig M, Nguyen TB, et al. Principles of T2*-weighted dynamic susceptibility 
contrast MRI technique in brain tumor imaging. J Magn Reson Imaging. 2014;41(2):296–313.

51. Welker K, Boxerman J, Kalnin A, Kaufmann T, Shiroishi M, Wintermark M. ASFNR recommendations for clinical performance of MR dynamic 
susceptibility contrast perfusion imaging of the brain. Am J Neuroradiol. 2015;36(6):E41–51.

52. Jonathan SV, Vakil P, Jeong Y, Ansari S, Hurley M, Bendok B, Carroll TJ. A radial 3D GRE-EPI pulse sequence with kz blip encoding 
for whole-brain isotropic 3D perfusion using DSC-MRI bolus tracking with sliding window reconstruction (3D RAZIR).

In: Proceedings of the 21st annual meeting of ISMRM. Salt Lake City, UT, USA. 2013, p 582.

53. Paulson ES, Prah DE, Schmainda KM. Spiral perfusion imaging with consecutive echoes (SPICE) for the simultaneous mapping of DSC- and 
DCE-MRI parameters in brain tumor patients: theory and initial feasibility. Tomography. 2016;2(4):295–307.

54. Gelderen P, van Grandin C, Petrella JR, Moonen CTW. Rapid three-dimensional MR imaging method for tracking a bolus of contrast agent 
through the brain. Radiology. 2000;216(2):603–8.

55. Newbould RD, Skare ST, Jochimsen TH, Alley MT, Moseley ME, Albers GW, Bammer R. Perfusion mapping with multiecho multishot parallel 
imaging EPI. Magn Reson Med. 2007;58(1):70–81.

56. Boxerman JL, Hamberg LM, Rosen BR, Weisskoff RM. MR contrast due to intravascular magnetic susceptibility perturbations. Magn Reson 
Med. 1995;34(4):555–66.

57. Aronen HJ, Gazit IE, Louis DN, Buchbinder BR, Pardo FS, Weisskoff RM, et al. Cerebral blood volume maps of gliomas: comparison with 
tumor grade and histologic findings. Radiology. 1994;191(1):41–51.

58. Aronen HJ, Perkio J. Dynamic susceptibility contrast MRI of gliomas. Neuroimaging Clin N Am. 2002;12(4):501–23.

59. Østergaard L, Johannsen P, Høst-Poulsen P, Vestergaard-Poulsen P, Asboe H, Gee AD, Hansen SB, Cold GE, Gjedde A, Gyldensted

C. Cerebral blood flow measurements by magnetic resonance imaging bolus tracking: comparison with [15O]H2O positron emission tomography 
in humans. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 1998;18(9):935–40.

60. Østergaard L, Smith DF, Vestergaard-Poulsen P, Hansen S, Gee AD, Gjedde A, Gyldensted C. Absolute cerebral blood flow and blood 
volume measured by magnetic resonance imaging bolus tracking: comparison with positron emission tomography values. J Cereb Blood Flow 
Metab. 1998;18(4):425–32.

61. Schmiedeskamp H, Andre JB, Straka M, Christen T, Nagpal S, Recht L, Thomas RP, Zaharchuk G, Bammer R. Simultaneous perfusion and 
permeability measurements using combined spin- and gradient-echo MRI. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2013;33(5):732–43.

62. Schmiedeskamp H, Straka M, Newbould RD, Zaharchuk G, Andre JB, Olivot JM, Moseley ME, Albers GW, Bammer R. Combined spin- and 
gradient-echo perfusion-weighted imaging. Magn Reson Med. 2012;68(1):30–40.

63. Skinner JT, Robison RK, Elder CP, Newton AT, Damon BM, Quarles CC. Evaluation of a multiple spin- and gradient-echo (SAGE) EPI 
acquisition with SENSE acceleration: applications for perfusion imaging in and outside the brain. Magn Reson Imaging. 
2014;32(10):1171–80.

64. Stokes AM, Skinner JT, Yankeelov TE, Quarles CC. Assessment of a simplified spin and gradient echo (sSAGE) approach for human brain 
tumor perfusion imaging. Magn Reson Imaging. 2016;34(9):1248–55.

65. Donahue KM, Krouwer HG, Rand SD, Pathak AP, Marszalkowski CS, Censky SC, et al. Utility of simultaneously acquired gradientecho and 
spin-echo cerebral blood volume and morphology maps in brain tumor patients. Magn Reson Med. 2000;43(6):845–53.

66. Calamante F, Willats L, Gadian DG, Connelly A. Bolus delay and dispersion in perfusion MRI: implications for tissue predictor models 
in stroke. Magn Reson Med. 2006;55(5):1180–5.

67. Jochimsen TH, Newbould RD, Skare ST, Clayton DB, Albers GW, Moseley ME, Bammer R. Identifying systematic errors in quantitative 
dynamic susceptibility contrast perfusion imaging by high-resolution multi-echo parallel EPI. NMR Biomed. 2007;20(4):429–38.

68. Chakhoyan A, Leu K, Pope W, Cloughesy T, Ellingson

B. Improved spatiotemporal resolution of dynamic susceptibility contrast perfusion MRI in brain tumors using simultaneous multislice 
echo-planar imaging. Am J Neuroradiol. 2017;39(1):43–5.

69. Osch MJV, Vonken E-JP, Wu O, Viergever MA, Grond JVD, Bakker CJ. Model of the human vasculature for studying the influence of 
contrast injection speed on cerebral perfusion MRI. Magn Reson Med. 2003;50(3):614–22.

70. Semmineh N, Bell L, Stokes A, Hu L, Boxerman J, Quarles

C. Optimization of acquisition and analysis methods for clinical dynamic susceptibility contrast MRI Using a population-based digital 
reference object. Am J Neuroradiol. 2018;39(11):1981–8.

71. Schmainda K, Prah M, Hu L, Quarles C, Semmineh N, Rand S, et al. Moving toward a consensus DSC-MRI protocol: validation of a 
low–flip angle single-dose option as a reference standard for brain tumors. Am J Neuroradiol. 2019;40(4):626–33.

72. Zierler KL. Circulation times and the theory of indicatordilution methods for determining blood flow and volume. In: Handbook of 
physiology. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 1962.

with dynamic susceptibility contrast-enhanced MR imaging. Radiology. 1994;193(3):637–41.

88. Calamante F, Morup M, Hansen LK. Defining a local arterial input function for perfusion MRI using independent component analysis. 
Magn Reson Med. 2004;52(4):789–97.

89. Carroll TJ, Rowley HA, Haughton VM. Automatic calculation of the arterial input function for cerebral perfusion imaging with MR 
imaging. Radiology. 2003;227(2):593–600.

90. Rausch M, Scheffler K, Rudin M, Radu EW. Analysis of input functions from different arterial branches with gamma variate functions 
and cluster analysis for quantitative blood volume measurements. Magn Reson Imaging. 2000;18(10):1235–43.

p. 585–615.

91. Yang C, Karczmar GS, Medved M, Stadler WM. Estimating the arterial input function using two reference tissues in dynamic 
contrast-enhanced MRI studies: fundamental concepts and simulations. Magn Reson Med. 2004;52(5):1110–7.

73. Rosen BR, Belliveau JW, Vevea JM, Brady TJ. Perfusion imaging with NMR contrast agents. Magn Reson Med. 1990;14(2):249–65.

74. Simonsen CZ, Ostergaard L, Vestergaard-Poulsen P, Rohl L, Bjornerud A, Gyldensted C. CBF and CBV measurements by USPIO bolus 
tracking: reproducibility and comparison with Gdbased values. J Magn Reson Imaging. 1999;9(2):342–7.

75. Kiselev VG. On the theoretical basis of perfusion measurements by dynamic susceptibility contrast MRI. Magn Reson Med. 
2001;46(6):1113–22.

76. Calamante F, Connelly A, Van Osch MJP. Nonlinear ΔR2* effects in perfusion quantification using bolus-tracking MRI. Magn Reson Med. 
2009;61(2):486–92.

77. Meier P, Zierler KL. On the theory of the indicator-dilution method for measurement of blood flow and volume. J Appl Physiol. 
1954;6(12):731–44.

78. Lassen NA. Tracer kinetic methods in medical physiology.

92. Gruner R, Bjornara BT, Moen G, Taxt T. Magnetic resonance brain perfusion imaging with voxel-specific arterial input functions. J 
Magn Reson Imaging. 2006;23(3):273–84.

93. Bjornerud A, Emblem KE. A fully automated method for quantitative cerebral hemodynamic analysis using DSC-MRI. J Cereb Blood Flow 
Metab. 2010;30(5):1066–78.

94. Huang W, Chen Y, Fedorov A, Li X, Jajamovich GH, Malyarenko DI, Aryal MP, LaViolette PS, Oborski MJ, O’Sullivan F, Abramson RG, 
Jafari-Khouzani K, Afzal A, Tudorica A, Moloney B, Gupta SN, Besa C, Kalpathy-Cramer J, Mountz JM, Laymon CM, Muzi M, Schmainda K, Cao 
Y, Chenevert TL, Taouli B, Yankeelov TE, Fennessy F, Li X. The impact of arterial input function determination variations on prostate 
dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging pharmacokinetic modeling: a multicenter data analysis challenge. Tomography. 
2016;2(1):56–66.

New York: Raven Press; 1979.

95. Calamante F. Arterial input function in perfusion MRI: a comprehensive review. Prog Nucl Magn Reson Spectrosc. 2013;74:1–32.

79. Todd-Pokropek A. Estimating blood flow by deconvolution of the injection of radioisotope tracers. In: Rescigno A, Boicelli A, 
editors. Cerebral blood flow: mathematical models, instrumentation, and imaging techniques. New York: Plenum Press; 1988.

96. Willats L, Christensen S, Ma HK, Donnan GA, Connelly A, Calamante F. Validating a local arterial input function method for improved 
perfusion quantification in stroke. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2011;31(11):2189–98.

p. 107–19.

80. Rosen BR, Belliveau JW, Chien D. Perfusion imaging by nuclear magnetic resonance. Magn Reson Q. 1989;5(4):263–81.

81. Ostergaard L, Sorensen AG, Kwong KK, Weisskoff RM, Gyldensted C, Rosen BR. High resolution measurement of cerebral blood flow using 
intravascular tracer bolus passages. Part II: experimental comparison and preliminary results. Magn Reson Med. 1996;36(5):726–36.

82. Wu O, Østergaard L, Weisskoff RM, Benner T, Rosen BR, Sorensen AG. Tracer arrival timing-insensitive technique for estimating flow 
in MR perfusion- weighted imaging using singular value decomposition with a block-circulant deconvolution matrix. Magn Reson Med. 
2003;50(1):164–74.

83. Mouridsen K, Hansen MB, Ostergaard L, Jespersen SN. Reliable estimation of capillary transit time distributions using DSCMRI. J 
Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2014;34(9):1511–21.

84. Troprès I, Grimault S, Vaeth A, Grillon E, Julien C, Payen JF, Lamalle L, Decorps M. Vessel size imaging. Magn Reson Med. 
2001;45(3):397–408.

85. Digernes I, Bjørnerud A, Vatnehol SAS, Løvland G, Courivaud F, Vik-Mo E, et al. A theoretical framework for determining cerebral 
vascular function and heterogeneity from dynamic susceptibility contrast MRI. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2017;37(6):2237–48.

86. Troprès I, Pannetier N, Grand S, Lemasson B, Moisan A, Péoch M, et al. Imaging the microvessel caliber and density: principles and 
applications of microvascular MRI. Magn Reson Med. 2014;73(1):325–41.

87. Rempp KA, Brix G, Wenz F, Becker CR, Guckel F, Lorenz WJ. Quantification of regional cerebral blood flow and volume

97. Nejad-Davarani SP, Bagher-Ebadian H, Ewing JR, Noll DC, Mikkelsen T, Chopp M, Jiang Q. An extended vascular model for less biased 
estimation of permeability parameters in DCE-T1 images. NMR Biomed. 2017;30:6.

98. Nejad-Davarani SP, Bagher-Ebadian H, Ewing JR, Noll DC, Mikkelsen T, Chopp M, Jiang Q. A parametric model of the brain vascular 
system for estimation of the arterial input function (AIF) at the tissue level. NMR Biomed. 2017;30:5.

99. Jackson A, O’Connor J, Thompson G, Mills S. Magnetic resonance perfusion imaging in neuro-oncology. Cancer Imaging. 2008;8:186–99.

100. Wetzel SG, Cha S, Johnson G, et al. Relative cerebral blood volume measurements in intracranial mass lesions: interobserver and 
intraobserver reproducibility study. Radiology. 2002;224(3):797–803.

101. Prah M, Stufflebeam S, Paulson E, Kalpathy-Cramer J, Gerstner E, Batchelor T, et al. Repeatability of standardized and normalized 
relative CBV in patients with newly diagnosed glioblastoma. Am J Neuroradiol. 2015;36(9):1654–61.

102. Bedekar D, Jensen T, Schmainda KM. Standardization of relative cerebral blood volume (rCBV) image maps for ease of both inter- and 
intrapatient comparisons. Magn Reson Med. 2010;64(3):907–13.

103. Quarles CC, Gochberg DF, Gore JC, Yankeelov TE. A theoretical framework to model DSC-MRI data acquired in the presence of contrast 
agent extravasation. Phys Med Biol. 2009;54(19):5749–66.

104. Semmineh NB, Xu J, Skinner JT, Xie J, Li H, Ayers G, et al.

Assessing tumor cytoarchitecture using multiecho DSC-MRI

derived measures of the transverse relaxivity at tracer equilibrium (TRATE). Magn Reson Med. 2015;74(3):772–84.

105. Paulson ES, Schmainda KM. Comparison of dynamic susceptibility-weighted contrast-enhanced MR methods: recommendations for measuring 
relative cerebral blood volume in brain tumors. Radiology. 2008;249(2):601–13.

106. Boxerman JL, Schmainda KM, Weisskoff RM. Relative cerebral blood volume maps corrected for contrast agent extravasation 
significantly correlate with glioma tumor grade, whereas uncorrected maps do not. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2006;27(4):859–67.

107. Hu L, Baxter L, Pinnaduwage D, Paine T, Karis J, Feuerstein B, et al. Optimized preload leakage-correction methods to improve the 
diagnostic accuracy of dynamic susceptibility-weighted contrast-enhanced perfusion MR imaging in posttreatment gliomas. Am J 
Neuroradiol. 2009;31(1):40–8.

108. Hu L, Baxter L, Smith K, Feuerstein B, Karis J, Eschbacher J, Coons S, Nakaji P, Yeh R, Debbins J, Heiserman J. Relative cerebral 
blood volume values to differentiate high-grade glioma recurrence from posttreatment radiation effect: direct correlation between 
image-guided tissue histopathology and localized dynamic susceptibility-weighted contrast-enhanced perfusion MR imaging measurements. Am 
J Neuroradiol. 2008;30(3):552–8.

109. Leu K, Boxerman JL, Cloughesy TF, Lai A, Nghiemphu PL, Liau LM, Pope WB, Ellingson BM. Improved leakage correction for single-echo 
dynamic susceptibility contrast perfusion MRI estimates of relative cerebral blood volume in high-grade gliomas by accounting for 
bidirectional contrast agent exchange. Am J Neuroradiol. 2016;37(8):1440–6.

110. Semmineh NB, Stokes AM, Bell LC, Boxerman JL, Quarles

CC. A population-based digital reference object (DRO) for optimizing dynamic susceptibility contrast (DSC)-MRI methods for clinical 
trials. Tomography. 2017;3(1):41–9.

111. Leu K, Boxerman J, Ellingson B. Effects of MRI protocol parameters, preload injection dose, fractionation strategies, and leakage 
correction algorithms on the fidelity of dynamic-susceptibility contrast MRI estimates of relative cerebral blood volume in gliomas. Am 
J Neuroradiol. 2016;38(3):478–84.

112. Schmainda KM, Rand SD, Joseph AM, et al. Characterization of a first-pass gradient- echo spin-echo method to predict brain tumor 
grade and angiogenesis. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2004;25(9):1524–32.

113. Stokes AM, Semmineh N, Quarles CC. Validation of a T1 and T2* leakage correction method based on multiecho dynamic susceptibility 
contrast MRI using MION as a reference standard. Magn Reson Med. 2016;76(2):613–25.

114. Varallyay CG, Nesbit E, Horvath A, Varallyay P, Fu R, Gahramanov S, et al. Cerebral blood volume mapping with ferumoxytol in

dynamic susceptibility contrast perfusion MRI: comparison to standard of care. J Magn Reson Imaging. 2018;48(2):441–8.

115. Vasanawala SS, Nguyen K-L, Hope MD, Bridges MD, Hope TA, Reeder SB, et al. Safety and technique of ferumoxytol administration for 
MRI. Magn Reson Med. 2016;75(5):2107–11.

116. Neuwelt EA, et al. The potential of ferumoxytol nanoparticle magnetic resonance imaging, perfusion, and angiography in central 
nervous system malignancy: a pilot study. Neurosurgery. 2007;60(4):601–11.

117. Varallyay CG, Nesbit E, Fu R, Gahramanov S, Moloney B, Earl E, Muldoon LL, Li X, Rooney WD, Neuwelt EA. High-resolution 
steady-state cerebral blood volume maps in patients with central nervous system neoplasms using ferumoxytol, a superparamagnetic iron 
oxide nanoparticle. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2013;33(5):780–6.

118. Gahramanov S, Muldoon LL, Varallyay CG, Li X, Kraemer DF, Fu R, Hamilton BE, Rooney WD, Neuwelt EA. Pseudoprogression of 
glioblastoma after chemo- and radiation therapy: diagnosis by using dynamic susceptibility-weighted contrast-enhanced perfusion MR 
imaging with ferumoxytol versus gadoteridol and correlation with survival. Radiology. 2013;266(3):842–52.

119. Gahramanov S, Raslan A, Muldoon L, Hamilton B, Rooney W, Varallyay C, et al. Potential for differentiation of pseudoprogression 
from true tumor progression with dynamic susceptibilityweighted contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging using ferumoxytol vs. 
gadoteridol: a pilot study. Int J Radiat. 2011;79(2):514–23.

120. Patel P, Baradaran H, Delgado D, Askin G, Christos P, Tsiouris AJ, et al. MR perfusion-weighted imaging in the evaluation of 
high-grade gliomas after treatment: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Neuro-Oncology. 2017;19(1):118–27.

121. Boxerman JL, Prah D, Paulson E, Machan J, Bedekar D, Schmainda K. The role of preload and leakage correction in gadolinium-based 
cerebral blood volume estimation determined by comparison with MION as a criterion standard. Am J Neuroradiol. 2012;33(6):1081–7.

122. Ellingson BM, Bendszus M, Boxerman J, Barboriak D, Erickson BJ, Smits M, et al. Consensus recommendations for a standardized brain 
tumor imaging protocol in clinical trials. Neuro-Oncology. 2015;17(9):1188–98.

123. Schmainda K, Prah M, Rand S, Liu Y, Logan B, Muzi M, et al. Multisite concordance of DSC-MRI analysis for brain tumors: results of 
a national cancer institute quantitative imaging network collaborative project. Am J Neuroradiol. 2018;39(6):1008–16.

124. DSC MRI Biomarker Ctte. DSC MRI Biomarker Ctte - QIBA Wiki. 2019. Available from https://qibawiki.rsna.org/index.php/ 
DSC_MRI_Biomarker_Ctte


