The aim of the book is to provide a concise textbook for students on an advanced undergraduateor aﬁrst-year graduatecoursefromvarious disciplines, 
suchas applied mathematics,controlandengineering,whowanttolearnamodernstandardofnumerical methods of ordinary and delay differential equations. Their 
stability analysis is also explained. Experts in applied mathematics, control and engineering ﬁelds can also learn the recent developments in numerical 
analysis of such differential systems. Major algorithms of numerical solution are clearly described.

Ordinary differential equations (ODEs) have a long history in mathematics and provide a valuable resource for its development. At the same time, they 
provide a strong mathematical tool to express phenomena of a wide variety in science and engineering. Therefore, graduate students, scientists and 
engineers are required to have knowledge and experience of ODEs. The idea of mathematical formulation to give a functional relationship of an unknown 
function and its derivative can be extendedfurthermore.OnepowerfulwaytoextendODEsistotreatequationsoffunctions of several independent variables, called 
partial differential equations (PDEs). Another way is to incorporate unknown functions with delayed argument, called delay differential equations 
(DDEs). Mathematical analysis has developed to elucidate properties of differential equations, e.g. existence of solutions of the equations. Hence, in 
some cases we can obtain a solution of a differential equation by algebraic combinations of known mathematical functions. In many practical cases, 
however, such a solution method is quite difﬁcult and numerical approximations are called for. Modern computers accelerate the situation and, moreover, 
launch more possibilities of numerical means.

Henceforth, the knowledge and expertise of numerical solution of differential equations become a requirement in the broad area of science and 
engineering. One might think that a well-organised software package such as MATLAB can provide the solution. In a sense it is true, but one must be 
aware that blind employment of a software package does not help the users. An understanding of numerical solution of differential equations is still 
necessary. The present book is intended to give the principles of numerical solution of ordinary differential equations as well as of delay differential 
equations. To obtain a broader perspective of numerical analysis in
applied mathematics, a short introduction to polynomial interpolation is also given. In particular, we take note that there are a few concise textbooks 
of delay differential equations and have tried to give descriptions that are as transparent as possible.

The prerequisite of the book is knowledge of calculus and linear algebra at college level. Each chapter is followed by remarks on further development of 
the chapter topic and exercises. We hope the readers ﬁnd the topic interesting and try to obtain further developments by themselves.


